---
title: "Al-Qalqashandī's Lost Tribes: Mamluk Genealogy, Identity and Administration"
excerpt: "Yossef Rapoport"
institution: "Queen Mary University of London"
author_profile: false
type: "Working Paper"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
layout: single
---

[*Download PDF Here*](https://www.egylandscape.org/papers/April2021_RapoportWorkingPaper.pdf)

### Author: [Yossef Rapoport](https://www.egylandscape.org/members/YossefRapoport/)
**Professor in Islamic History** 
*Queen Mary, University of London*

*Nihāyat al-arab fī maʿrifat ansāb al-ʿarab*, "The Ultimate Ambition in
the Knowledge of the Lineages of the Arabs", is a genealogical treatise
composed by the Mamluk bureaucrat Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad al-Qalqashandī
(1355--1418). It holds over one thousand entries for Arab tribes,
sections and clans, covering nearly a millennium of Islamic and
pre-Islamic history. The arrangement of the entries is alphabetical,
with tribal groups that share the same name treated in separate entries.
There are, for example, twenty-six different entries for tribes named
Banū Thaʿlaba, each distinguished by their specific lineage.

There are two entries for the Banū Badr. The first is for the ʿAdnānī
Banū Badr, who trace their lineage to the Zubayriyyūn and who dwell in
the region of al-Ashmūnayn in Upper Egypt. The second entry is devoted
to the Banū Badr who formed al-Qalqashandī's own tribal group:

Another Banū Badr, of the Fazāra, of the Qays ʿAylān. We will discuss
the lineage of the Fazāra in their own entry. \[Ibn Khaldūn\] said in
his \[*Kitāb*\] *al-ʿIbar* that the Banū Badr were the leaders of the
Fazāra during the pre-Islamic Jāhiliyya. They were leaders of the entire
Ghaṭafān, while Qays and their brothers the Banū Thaʿlaba bin ʿAdī
obeyed their judgments (*tadīnū la-hum*). One of their members was
Ḥudhayfa b. Badr b. ʿUmar b. Ḥarba b. Lūdhān b. Thaʿlaba b. ʿAdī b.
Fazāra, owner of the horse known as al-Ghabrāʾ, which raced the horse
known as Dāḥis, and that was the cause of the war known as \[the Day
of\] Dāḥis between ʿAbs and Ghaṭafān, as is recounted in the books of
the *siyar* (the popular epics).

I say: Those Banū Badr are our tribe (*qabīlatunā*), in which we take
pride (*naʿtazī*) and from which we claim lineage (*nantasibu*). They
are the most noble among the Arabs of the Qalyūbiyya province in Egypt.
Their neighbours in Qalyūbiyya are their paternal cousins, the Banū
Māzin of the Fazāra. Each of the Banū Badr and the Banū Māzin have their
own villages (*bilād*). The two are in a constant state of enmity and
bad blood, but the Banū Badr have the leadership and the upper hand. The
people of our village (*balda*) of Qalqashanda belong to one of the two
groups (*firqatayn*), either the Banū Badr or the Banū Māzin.[^1]

Al-Qalqashandī's entry for the Banū Badr begins with the pre-Islamic
Arabian Peninsula, citing Ibn Khaldūn on the elevated status of Banū
Badr within the Fazāra confederacy in pre-Islamic times. It then reminds
the reader of the heroics of most famous Badrī, Ḥudhayfa, familiar to
the readers from the popular Arabic epics. Al-Qalqashandī then sharply
shifts from the mythical and the heroic to the mundane, to the
countryside of late medieval Egypt, and to his native village of
Qalqashanda (modern Qarqashanda) in al-Qalyūbiyya, the agricultural
hinterland of Cairo. The Banū Badr of Qalqashanda, like their
pre-Islamic kinsmen, successfully prevail over a neighboring clan. The
epic battles of pre-Islamic Arabia are played out in the provincial
backwaters of the Egyptian delta.

Al-Qalqashandī wrote two other treatises on Arab tribal affairs, and he
uses both to further highlight his personal identification with the Banū
Badr. The genealogical section of *Ṣubḥ al-Aʿshá*, the mammoth
administrative manual he completed in 814/1412, has the same account of
the Banū Badr, minus the triumphalist tone towards the Banū Māzin. [^2]
Al-Qalqashandī's final genealogical treatise, *Qalāʾid al-jumān fī
al-taʿrīf bi-qabāʾil ʿarab al-zamān* (The Abundant Necklaces Regarding
the Knowledge of the Arab Tribes of Our Time), written in 819/1416,
holds another version of the Banū Badr entry. Here al-Qalqashandī
locates the Banū Māzin in the villages of Zufaytā and Sindibīs, only a
few kilometers south of his native town. He also engages in more
detailed account of Ḥudhayfa's race against Qays al-ʿAbsī, claiming
support from books of history (*taʾrīkh*) as well as from the popular
epics.[^3]

The reported Arab tribal identity of the people of Qalqashanda in the
delta, where our author grew up in the 1360s and 1370s, is not in itself
extraordinary. In thirteenth-century and fourteenth-century Egypt, the
majority of Arab tribes were sedentary rather than nomadic.[^4] Whenever
we encounter Egyptian tribes in Ayyubid and Mamluk sources, whether in
al-Nābulusī's cadastral survey of the Fayyum from the 1240s or in
chroniclers' accounts of fourteenth-century Bedouin rebellions, they are
primarily described as settled agriculturalists. As I had argued
elsewhere, these tribal structures spread in the Egyptian countryside in
the twelfth century. The phenomenon of tribal villages coincided with
the virtual disappearance of private ownership of arable land and the
Ayyubid imposition of collective taxation at the village level.[^5]

Al-Qalqashandī is unique, however, in offering us an insider view of
this tribal identity. Al-Qalqashandī's autobiographical interventions
allow us to explore the meaning of tribal identity for his understanding
of himself, his past and his place in society. For his entire adult
life, al-Qalqashandī served the Mamluk state, which was engaged in
violent suppression of numerous rebellions by Arab tribes, especially in
Upper Egypt. He is the embodiment of a late medieval bureaucrat; in
fact, much of what we know about the administration of medieval Muslim
states comes from his pen. In what sense did he identify himself as a
member of the Banū Badr? What social prestige did he derive from
repeatedly flagging up his Fazārī ancestry? And how did his attachment
to an Arab tribe sit alongside with his life-long service to the Mamluk
regime, which was engaged in violent conflicts against Arab uprisings
since its inception?

These questions regarding al-Qalqashandī's understanding of his own
'Arab-ness' are bound with the genre of genealogical writing.
Al-Qalqashandī was the most prolific of Mamluk-era genealogists, but he
was also heavily indebted to earlier authors. His most important sources
are works by two Mamluk state officials of previous generations: the
thirteenth-century al-Ḥamdānī (d. ca. 1300), and the fourteenth-century
Ibn Faḍl Allāh al-ʿUmarī (d. 1349). Each of the three authors had their
own agenda and ways of organizing genealogical material, but they form a
coherent corpus that was closely associated with the preoccupations of
Mamluk administration.

As recent scholarship has shown, medieval Islamic genealogies were never
simply records of biological descent groups. Zoltan Szombathy and, more
recently, Peter Webb argued that the science of genealogy emerged in the
urban centres of ʿAbbasid Iraq as an attempt to create an exclusive Arab
identity vis-á-vis recent converts of Persian origins. Scholars like Ibn
al-Kalbī (d. 819 or 821) sought to homogenize different lineages with
Qur'anic and biblical figures, inventing a pan-Arab and universal
genealogical framework.[^6] Kazuo Morimoto demonstrated that the genre
of Ṭālibid genealogies emerged in the tenth century in tandem with the
new institution of *naqīb al-ashrāf*, who was responsible for
distributing pensions and endowment benefits to descendants of the
Prophet's household.[^7] The visualisation of genealogical trees in the
post-Mongol world has been linked by İlker Evrim Binbaş to a
universalist outlook and with the rise of dynastic forms of political
legitimation.[^8]

Taking the lead from this critical approach to medieval Islamic
genealogies, this paper assesses the purpose of al-Qalqashandī's
genealogical writings and their intended audience. I will first show
that Mamluk genealogical writing emerged in the thirteenth century as a
branch of state administration, in response to the dominance of tribal
structures in the Arabic-speaking villages of Egypt, Syria and
Palestine. Mamluk-era genealogical treatises, I will argue, were a
bureaucratized method of mapping relations of power in the countryside.
They are focused on the tribes found within the territories of the
Mamluk state and commonly list them by geographical or alphabetical
order, rather than as genealogical tree.

At the same time, and despite their professional service to the Mamluk
state, the authors of Mamluk-era genealogical treatises self-identified
as members of Arab tribes or clans. In their writings, allegiances to
state and to tribe are not in conflict, and the legitimacy of the Mamluk
state is never in doubt. Instead, all three authors seek to endow tribal
structures with what Frederik Barth called the 'cultural stuff':
awareness of shared culture and history. Al-Qalqashandī, himself a
former villager, embarked on a historiographical project of tracing back
the genealogical tree that linked all tribes that existed in his own
time, and of retrieving the customs and traditions of pre-Islamic times.
In his writings, Arab-ness and Bedouin-ness were culturally defined, and
this opened up tribal boundaries to all Muslims who wished to assume an
Arabian lineage and a tribal identity. Moreover, the need to collect
tribal traditions led al-Qalqashandī to adopt materials from the
Arthur-like Arabic popular epics, which were otherwise spurned by
Mamluk-era scholars as collections of tall-tales.

#### Mamluk Genealogical Literature

The distinctive genre of Mamluk genealogical writing begins with Badr
al-Dīn al-Ḥamdānī (born 1205-6, d. ca. 1300), also known as *mihmindār
al-ʿarab*, a state official who served several Ayyubid and Mamluk
sultans. As *mihmindār*, al-Ḥamdānī was in charge of receiving
delegations of Arab tribal leaders, providing them with accommodation
and presenting them to the ruler. The office of a *mihmindār* was an
Ayyubid innovation, possibly connected with Sultan al-ʿĀdil's
appointment of "Amir of the Arabs" around the beginning the thirteenth
century. The position of the *mihmindār* was then adopted by the Mamluks
and is attested up to the beginning of the fifteenth century.[^9] Most
of what we know of al-Ḥamdānī comes from his first-person accounts of
hospitality extended to Arab amirs.[^10] In biographical dictionaries,
al-Ḥamdānī is known primarily for his Bedouin-style poetry, as well as
lines of praise for al-Zāhir Baybars while on campaign.[^11]

Al-Ḥamdānī's genealogical treatise has not survived, but much of it was
copied more or less verbatim by al-ʿUmarī and al-Qalqashandī. The
passages quoted in these later sources show that al-Ḥamdānī introduced
novel features that set the genealogical writing in the Mamluk period
apart from earlier works in the genre. Unlike earlier genealogical
treatises, al-Ḥamdānī's focus is almost exclusively on the tribes that
existed in his own time, within the boundaries of the Mamluk state.
Moreover, al-Ḥamdānī opted for a geographical organization of his
material, proceeding by the location of tribal groups in his own day,
rather than by lineage. In his account of the Egyptian Arabs, al-Ḥamdānī
started with the tribes resident in Aswan, and then progressed
northwards through the Nile valley.[^12] He associated each tribe and
clan with a territory, called *diyār* or *bilād*. The territories of the
Lakhm confederacy, for example, covered a 100-kilometer stretch of
agricultural land in the main Nile valley, from Biba in the south to
Helwan in the north, with each of its nine subordinate tribes
controlling a delimited sub-section.[^13]

Al-Ḥamdānī is explicit about the agricultural activities of the Arab
tribes. Five different Saʿd groups of Judhām resided in the regions of
Minyat Ghamr and Ziftā in the central delta, where they held the area
from Tall Ṭanbūl to Nūb Tarīf. They included the people of the villages
of Barhamtūsh and its shaykhs, Taqdūs (mod. Daqados) and Damdīṭ.
Al-Ḥamdānī is quoted as saying that the Banū Saʿd are "village headmen
and protectors, and own fields and victuals (*maʾākil*)". He adds that
they cause much mischief (*fasād*), a rare negative comment.[^14] The
Banu Ḥarām were *qāḍī*s, jurists, professional witnesses, village
headmen and irrigation officials (*khawla*). Unlike most other tribal
groups, the Ḥarām had no territory (*dār*) of its own.[^15]

The localization of tribes was far more important for al-Ḥamdānī than
their lineage. In fact, al-Ḥamdānī is rather uninterested in tracing the
ancestry of tribal groups, and al-Qalqshandī often notes that al-Ḥamdānī
did not trace 'upwards' the genealogy of the tribal groups he
discussed.[^16] The confederacy of the Jarm in Syria included 'their
allies, neighbours and those who seek protection with them'.[^17]
Al-Ḥamdānī also has a long list of the groupings that join the Syrian Āl
Faḍl and mix with them (*yanḍāfu ilayhim wa-yadkhulu fīhim*). He fails
to provide lineage to any of them.[^18] Several tribal groups in the
Egyptian delta are said to be allies of another clan, but again lack a
genealogy of their own.[^19] The same is true for the three Arab tribes
located in the Sinai -- the Bayāḍa, Ṣadr and the ʿĀʾidh; none of the
three is traced to a larger confederacy or a higher lineage.[^20]

In some ways, al-Ḥamdānī's text is not strictly a genealogical treatise,
even if contemporaries labelled it as such.[^21] Al-Ḥamdānī did not
conceive of a genealogical tree unifying all the different Arab sections
he mentions. Perhaps he was unable to construct one. Instead,
al-Ḥamdānī's view of the countryside has much in common with that of a
tax-collector. There is much similarity here with al-Nābulusī's
cadastral survey of 1245, where most villages in the Fayyum were
inhabited by a named clan, with clans then forming territorially
contiguous confederacies.[^22]

Despite his state-centred approach, al-Ḥamdānī is mostly sympathetic to
the Arab tribes. His name suggests that he claimed for himself descent
from the Banū Ḥamdān, the tenth-century rulers of Aleppo. Writing to an
audience of other state functionaries, al-Ḥamdānī reassures his readers
of the quality and reliability of Arab troops. The Arabs are good
warriors, who are willing to act as advance forces and they fight well
against the Mongols, barely losing a battle.[^23] He admits that the
Thaʿlaba of Syria are known for collaborating with the Crusaders, but he
has only witnessed them to be brave raiders and holy warriors, who
inflicted heavy losses on the Franks.[^24] It should be recalled that
al-Ḥamdānī was writing in the aftermath of the great Arab rebellion that
engulfed Upper Egypt in 1252-3, when relations between state and tribes
were at a particular ebb.

The second key text in the corpus of Mamluk genealogical writings is Ibn
Faḍl Allāh al-ʿUmarī's section on the Arab tribes in his encyclopaedic
*Masālik al-Abṣār*, completed near middle of the fourteenth century. In
the chapter on 'The Arabs found in our present time, and their
locations', al-ʿUmarī, like al-Ḥamdānī, focused on the Arab tribes of
his own age, and in particular on their relationship with the Mamluk
state. This section covers Arab tribes from the Atlantic to Iraq, but
the vast majority of the text is devoted to the Arab tribes that inhabit
Egypt and Syria.[^25] In his separate administrative manual,
*al-Taʿrīf*, he also deals with hierarchy of tribal amirs appointed by
the Mamluk state and the proper ways of corresponding with them.[^26]

Al-ʿUmarī cites al-Ḥamdānī as his main source, and follows him in
arranging the discussion geographically rather than by lineage.[^27]
After an historical prologue about the categories of Arabs in the
pre-Islamic period, he moves on to an account of the Arab groupings
(*ṭawāʾif*) found in the present day.[^28] He starts with the Arabs of
Syria, to whom he devotes the major part of the work, and follows with
shorter chapters on the Arabs of Egypt and the Maghreb, mostly
progressing in geographical sequence from province to province.

Like al-Ḥamdānī, the tone of the account is positive towards the Arabs,
seen as useful and loyal servants of the state and protectors of the
urban population. For al-ʿUmarī, the Arabs are "the walls of the cities,
the protectors of highways, and serve as guides for advance forces and
as auxiliary troops. In our kingdom of Egypt and Syria some of them are
protectors of roads, are in charge of the horses of the post, and are
commonly the drivers of cattle (*siyāq*)".[^29]

Al-ʿUmarī departs from al-Ḥamdānī in three major ways. First, he
displays his own tribal identity much more prominently, in a way that
anticipates al-Qalqashandī's personal focus. He deliberately opens his
section on the tribes of Egypt with account of the Banū ʿUmar, and
reports that he is a descendant of Khalaf b. Naṣr Shams al-Dawla Abū
ʿAlī, who arrived in Fatimid Egypt in the days of Ṭalāʾiʿ bin Ruzzīq in
the middle of the twelfth century. This is 'my lineage and my people',
he boasts, and adds that he devoted a separate volume to the noble
qualities of his tribe, a work he entitled *Fawāḍil al-sumar fī faḍāʾil
Āl ʿUmar* ("Valuable late-night conversations on the virtues of Āl
ʿUmar").[^30] This work is considered lost.[^31]

Second, al-ʿUmarī places much emphasis on the Arab amirs, especially the
amirs of the Āl Rabīʿah of the Syrian desert, and their interactions
with the Mamluk court. This is the reason for dealing with Arab tribal
affairs: "Rulers are always well-disposed towards their delegations,
shower them with hefty gifts and give them the most noble parts of the
land as *iqṭāʿ*".[^32] The Āl Rabīʿah are the "kings of the
desert"[^33], who participate in military campaigns and fight each other
over their herds of camels.[^34] The account of the rather tumultuous
relationship between the amirs of this confederacy and the Mamluk
sultans takes up as much as a quarter of the entire chapter on the
Arabs. For this section, al-ʿUmarī interviewed the professional
genealogist of the Rabīʿah confederacy, a certain Maḥmūd b. ʿArrām, and
held conversations with the amirs Faḍl b. ʿIsá and Musá b. Muhannā
during their stays in Cairo.[^35]

The Arab amirs are not only al-ʿUmarī's interlocutors, but also his
audience, and he counsels them on framing their genealogical claims in
the most effective way. While the Rabīʿah falsely claimed to be
descendants of the union between the Abbasid vizier Jaʿfar al-Barmakī
and Hārūn al-Rashīd's sister, al-ʿUmarī advises them to opt for an
alternative lineage, one that comes from a noble Ṭayyʾ Arab man.
Al-ʿUmarī explains that it is better to claim a noble Arab lineage over
the non-Arab lineage of the Barmakids, despite the latter's power and
reputation.[^36]

Finally, and most importantly, al-ʿUmarī projects a stark distinction
between the 'true' Arabs of the desert, camel-herding and mobile like
the Āl Rabīʿah, and the sedentary Arab tribes, who are no longer fully
Arabs. In concluding the section on the Arabs of Syria, after dealing at
length with the Āl Rabīʿah, al-ʿUmarī writes:

In the lands of Syria there are various people of Arab stock (*min
ṣalībat al-ʿarab*), who are no longer to be considered Arabs (*qad
kharajū bi-hā ʿan ḥukm al-ʿarab*), as they have become settled,
sedentary people (*ahl ḥāḍira sākina*), who occupy fixed abodes (*ʿummār
diyār qāṭina*).[^37]

Al-ʿUmarī follows up with a long list of these sedentary Arabs, starting
with those who inhabit Gaza and Hebron. The list then goes on through
most major cities of Syria and Palestine and their hinterlands.
Al-ʿUmarī regards these settled communities with disdain, denying them
the full Arab-ness he accorded to the amirs of the Syrian desert. At the
same time, he also admits them as Arabs who have a tribal group
identity, and who can still claim descent from the Arabian genealogical
tree. This reality does not fit his idealized definition of what Arabs
should be, and he therefore creates a narrative of sedentarization,
telling us that the sedentary tribes are of Arab stock, but have lost
their Arab-ness by becoming sedentary. This narrative is a fiction not
supported by any evidence, but is rather al-ʿUmarī's way of reconciling
with the realities on the ground.

When moving on to discuss the tribes of Egypt, al-ʿUmarī creates the
same distinction between 'true' nomadic Arabs and sedentary Arab
communities, and then links this distinction to their status in the eyes
of the central government. The vast majority of Egyptian Arabs, he
explains in a famous passage, are settled agriculturalists, and are
therefore not held in great esteem by the court:

The Arabs in Upper and Lower Egypt belong to many groups, peoples and
tribes (*jamāʿāt, shuʿūb wa-qabāʾil*). However, despite their wealth and
geographical extent, they are not held in high regard by the sultan, as
they are sedentary people of the sown fields (*idh kānū ahl ḥāḍira
wa-zarʿ*). None of them makes seasonal travels to Najd or Tihāma, Iraq
or Syria (*lā yunjid wa-lā yutham, wal-lā yuʿriqu wa-lā yashām*), and
they do not leave the boundaries of the fences.[^38]

In Egypt, where the vast majority of the Arab tribes were not nomadic,
the gap between the romanticised Arab constructed by al-ʿUmarī and the
reality was wide. The sedentary Arab tribes of Egypt are here
specifically identified as agriculturalists, people of the sown. There
is not even a process of sedentarizaton. The Arab villagers of Egypt
lack full Arab-ness, and that means that they do not have the same
social respect and political clout accorded to the nomadic tribes who
fulfilled al-ʿUmarī's Arab ideal.

#### Al-Qalqashandī on the Purposes of Genealogy

Al-Qalqashandī came to write about genealogy late in life. He was born
in Qalqashanda in 756/1355, but after completing his education moved to
Alexandria to serve the local governor there, sometime before 1380. He
then got a clerical job in Cairo, thanks to the patronage of Badr al-Dīn
Ibn Faḍl Allāh, another scion of the al-ʿUmarī clan. He made his home in
the Egyptian capital, where he was a frequent visitor to the home of the
historian al-Maqrīzī, who described him as a 'great talker and
babbler.'[^39] After completing his encyclopaedic *Ṣubḥ* in 814/1412, he
devoted the few remaining years of his life to tribal affairs. He wrote
the *Nihāya* a couple of years later, and completed the *Qalāʾid*, his
final genealogical treatise, in 819/1416.

A bureaucrat like al-Ḥamdānī and al-ʿUmarī, al-Qalqashandī was
continuing a genealogical tradition bound with the practices of the
Mamluk state. The overtly administrative purpose of genealogical writing
is well articulated in *Qalāʾid al-jumān*, his later treatise, which is
presented as a handy manual for the secretary. Al-Qalqashandī is here
entirely focussed on contemporary tribes within the Mamluk realm with
whom the secretary needs to correspond:

The *kātib al-inshāʾ* is required to know in detail only those Arab
tribesmen (*ʿurbān*) of this day and age who are within the realms of
the kingdom of Egypt, and to whom royal correspondence is addressed. He
also needs to know what concerns the more minor clans (*adhyāl*) of
their tribes that are not of the pedigree of being addressed, or those
who are in alliance with them, or take pride in a relationship with that
tribe for any reason.[^40]

Thus, the primary functional rationale for genealogy is epistolary. Here
al-Qalqashandī formalizes the state-centred prism of the genealogical
writing by al-Ḥamdānī and al-ʿUmarī. A scribe needs to know how to write
to tribal people, who take pride in their lineage, and to know which
tribal group is fitting of royal correspondence.

But, perhaps under the influence of Ibn Khaldūn, who died in Cairo only
a few years earlier, al-Qalqashandī sought to expand the remit of
genealogy to society at large. In a section on the benefits of the
genealogical science, al-Qalqashandī emphasises the role of genealogy in
establishing social hierarchies and political legitimacy. He opens with
praising God for singling out the Arabs from the great multitude of
nations and tribes, and pointing out that knowledge of the Prophetic
lineage is part of Islamic belief.[^41] Al-Qalqashandī then demonstrates
the importance of genealogy for maintaining social order. Knowledge of
genealogy prevents false claims to lineage, with legal implications for
matters of kinship, including inheritance, guardianship in marriage, the
identification of beneficiaries of endowments, and the rules regarding
the *ʿāqila*, or blood-money group. Another benefit is that knowledge of
genealogy ensures that a prospective groom is equal in social status to
the bride, under the legal principle of *kafāʾa*. Conversely, knowledge
of genealogy also ensures the noble lineage of prospective brides, a
matter not regulated in Islamic law. Finally, lineage determines the
choice of the caliph, who, according to the Shāfiʿīs, should be a
Qurashī; and if no Qurashī is found, then a Kinānī from Khuzayma.[^42]

As far as we can tell, these are idealized or hypothetical objectives.
Mamluk-era collections of response (*fatāwā*) very rarely contain
questions regarding equality in marriage or the *ʿāqila* blood-money
group.[^43] Neither was the choice of a caliph a topical matter in the
sultanate, where ceremonial caliphs were put in place by the sultans.
Rather than taking these legal questions at face value, what
al-Qalqashandī is doing here is promoting a vision of a society where
every Muslim person, man or woman, belongs to a tribe. By broadening the
purpose of genealogy in this way, his audience is no longer merely the
chancery scribes, but all parents who wish to marry off their children.
The ability to distinguish false and correct tribal lineage should be,
in this re-formulation, key to social status in a Muslim society,
whether urban or rural, sedentary or nomad.

Al-Qalqashandī uses his genealogical writing to draw many of his
contemporaries into the orbit of tribal affiliations. The entry for the
Berber Banū Ghumāra contains a biographical entry for his maternal
grandfather, the companion of an itinerant Andalusi Sufi Shaykh.[^44]
The entry for the Banū Kināna is an occasion for mentioning
al-Qalqashandī's link to the prominent jurist Abu Ḥafṣ Sirāj al-Dīn
al-Bulqīnī (d. 1403), a native of the village of Bulqīna and supposedly
a member of the Kināna.[^45] As noted above, al-Qalqashandī specifically
mentions the Kināna as second only to Quraysh in their entitlement to
community leadership. The entry for the Banū Mudlij includes a reference
to al-Qalqashandī's commentary on the legal treatise of Kamāl al-Dīn
al-Nashāʾī (d. 1356).[^46]

Since al-Qalqashandī projects a society where everyone has a tribe to
take pride in, the intended audience of his genealogical treatises was
all members of the literate elite. This is best attested by the three
different dedications which envelop these works. The *Qalāʾid* is
dedicated to Abū al-Maʿālī al-Bārizī (d. 823/1420), head of the Chancery
(Dīwān al-Inshāʾ), whom al-Qalqashandī praises as being of the tribe of
Juhayna, known for their trustworthiness and their noble lineage.[^47]
In 846/1442-3, al-Qalqshandī's son Abū al-Fatḥ Muḥammad dedicated a copy
of the *Nihāya* to Zayn al-Dīn Abū al-Jūd Baqar ibn Rashīd, the amir of
the Arab tribes (*ʿurbān*) in the Sharqiyya and Gharbiyya
provinces.[^48] The copy furnishes us with direct evidence of the
consumption of the scholarly genealogical literature by the tribal
elites in the countryside. Another dedication of the *Nihāya*, probably
also by al-Qalqashandī's son, is addressed to a high-ranking member of
the military elite, al-Muʿizz al-Ashraf Abū al-Maḥāsin Jamāl a-Dīn
Yūsuf. This amir, almost certainly a *mamlūk* former slave or the son of
one, is provided with an honorary and doubtlessly made-up membership in
the Umayyad Banū Abān.[^49]

While the act of fabricating tribal lineages is not in itself unusual,
the three separate dedications demonstrate the range of the intended
audience of the genealogical text, audience that included state
administrators, Arab tribal leaders and Mamluk amirs. The contents were
adapted to fit the alleged tribal affiliations of the patrons, who were
invited to read the genealogical treatises not merely as an epistolary
guide or academic exercise, but also as means of discovering their own
place in society, each of them woven into the dynamic fabric of the
Arabian genealogical tree.

#### Who is an Arab?

As al-Qalqashandī was extending the orbit of tribalism to include wider
segments of society, he was also in need of a new definition of
Arab-ness, a definition that would allow for his own lived experience as
growing up as a tribal villager in the Egyptian delta. If al-ʿUmarī
equated true Arab-ness with nomadic existence, al-Qalqashandī shifts the
discussion to history, culture and language. Unlike earlier Mamluk
authors, he takes time to discuss the meaning of Arab identity in some
detail. This willingness to engage in theoretical definitions reveals
the influence of Ibn Khaldūn, but also indicates a need to reengage with
the question of Arab identity in light of changing social realities.

To the question of who is an Arab, al-Qalqashandī advances two
definitions of Arab-ness, one based on ethnic origin and one based on
language. The first is taken from the philologist al-Jawharī (d. ca.
1010), who states that the Arabs are a people (*jīl min al-nās*) who
reside in garrison towns, while the *aʿrāb* are the people of the
countryside. Al-Qalqashandī clarifies that the Arabs is the general
name, and the *aʿrāb* are a category of Arabs.[^50] The primordial abode
of the Arabs was the Arabian Peninsula, but they had been migrating
outside of it well before the advent of Islam. The Muslim conquests then
allowed the Arabs to 'fill the horizons', reaching Central Asia, the
Atlantic and the Sudan.[^51] In a universal, post-deluge genealogy, the
Arabs are descendants of Sām (Shem). Whether the Berbers are Arab or not
is a matter of dispute.[^52]

According to a second definition, taken from Ibn Khaldūn, the Arabs are
those who speak Arabic eloquently, and among whom rhetoric and eloquence
(*bayān* and *balāgha*) predominate. A person who does not speak good,
clear Arabic (*lam yufṣiḥ*) is a non-Arab, an *ʿajamī*, even if he was
an Arab by lineage.[^53] This Khaldunian definition is not, however,
followed through in the body of al-Qalqashandī's genealogical works,
where poetry is actually sparse, and proficiency in Arabic is not used
as an actual criterion of Arab-ness. One glaring example are the Banū
Kilāb of northern Syria; the fact that they speak Turkish, as reported
by al-ʿUmarī, does not seem to disqualify them from being Arabs.[^54]

Al-Qalqashandī further articulates Arab identity by appending a section
on pre-Islamic culture to his *Nihāyat al-Arab*. This section covers, in
a summary fashion, *Jāhilī* religious beliefs and idols, as well as
distinctively Arab sciences, such as physiognomy, dream interpretation,
observation of lunar mansions, and genealogy. This appendix is concluded
by a list of the Days, or battles, of the pre-Islamic Arabs (*ayyām
al-ʿarab*) and a long anecdote about a poetry competition, involving
al-Qalqashandī's ancestor Ḥudhayfa.[^55] Al-Qalqashandī attempts here to
create a link between antiquarian pre-Islamic practices, as reported by
Abbasid litterateurs, and the Arab tribesmen of his time. In fact, none
of these pre-Islamic sciences is reported in the entries for the tribes
of his day and age. This is a deliberate attempt to construct an
identity based on recourse to literary traditions, not a reflection of
reality.

Ultimately, the quintessential Arab-ness is the tribal structure itself.
Al-Qalqashandī cites hierarchies of lineage groups known from earlier
genealogical works: *shaʿb* for the collective of northern or southern
tribes, *qabīla* for confederacies, the intermediate *ʿimāra* and *baṭn*
for tribes, *fakhdh* for sections and *faṣīla* for an extended
household. But he also notes that in his own time only the terms
*qabīla* and *baṭn* are in frequent use, and the generic term *ḥayy* is
also commonly employed to signify any of these levels.[^56] Genealogical
hierarchy can also be ascertained by the name given to a tribe. In his
own time, names that starts with Banū and collective names, such as
al-Jaʿāfira, are used for tribes and sections. *Awlād* is used to refer
to smaller groups, while *Āl*, with the meaning of *ahl*, is used for
Syrian tribes and confederacies.[^57]

While al-Qalqashandī defines Arab-ness through lineage and tribalism,
his notion of Arab-ness is not based on nomadism. Unlike al-ʿUmarī, who
regarded the seasonal migration of nomads as the ultimate sign of full
and 'real' Arab identity, al-Qalqashandī rarely mentions camels or
tents.[^58] He copies some of al-ʿUmarī's passages on the Arab tribes of
Syrian desert and their leaders, but he chooses not to reproduce
al-ʿUmarī's passages on the distinctions between the true Arabs of the
desert and the sedentary tribes who are no longer Arabs.
Al-Qalqashandī's primary definitions of Arab-ness explicitly blur any
line between settled and nomadic existence, and he does not deem
sedentary Arabs in lower esteem.

Al-Qalqashandī was responding to wider changes in rural society. By his
time, after more than two centuries in which tribal identities became
common place in the Egyptian countryside, the tribal character of many
Egyptian villages had become entrenched. Consequently, the tendency to
call rural settlements by tribal names instead of their older Coptic
names had advanced significantly, so that by the early fifteenth century
the toponymy of the Egyptian countryside had become more Arab. The
Fawāṭiṭa, whom al-Ḥamdānī located in the region of al-Rashīd, were in
al-Qalqashandī's days associated with a village (*balda*) near
Alexandria named after them, Birkat al- Fawāṭiṭa.[^59] Other Egyptian
villages that became known after the names of tribal units included Banū
ʿAlī and Banū Nizār in al-Bahnasāwiyya, and al-Fahmīn in
al-Iṭfīḥiyya.[^60]

Within tribes, however, peasants may have been of lesser social status
than headmen or armed protectors. This is indicated in a short passage
where al-Qalqashandī notes that some Lakhm tribesmen migrated from the
eastern bank of the Nile to the western bank, retaining their
identification with their tribes (*maʿa shuhrati-him bi-qabāʾil-him*).
Then, 'those of them who remained in their original location were people
of plough and sowing. Arabs from the Halbā of Judhām came to dwell
there. They (the Halbā) adorn themselves in the adornments of the Arabs
(*wa-hum mutaḥallūna hunāka bi-ḥilyat al-ʿarab*)'.[^61] Al-Qalqashandī
seems to describe here the replacement of one tribal elite with another.
When the Lakhm Arab elites moved to the western bank, the peasants in
the eastern bank came to be associated with another tribal group, the
Halbā of Judhām. The text here also implies that this tribal elite
distinguished itself from ordinary peasants through dress or other
accoutrements specifically associated with Arab culture.

Another aspect of the way of life of the settled Egyptian Arabs was the
constant state of conflict between neighbouring clans. We noted above
the "enmity and bad blood" between the Banū Badr and their Banū Māzin
neighbours. Also in the delta, al-Qalqashandī states that the Banū Saʿd
are in a state of constant hostility with the Banū Wāʾil, and the
fighting between the two groups involves a great number of men.[^62] Ibn
Khaldūn similarly comments on the settled Arabs of Upper Egypt, who
cultivate the land and pay land-tax to the Mamluk sultan, yet engage in
wars and conflict with each other beyond what is found among the clans
of the desert.[^63] This emphasis on the constant infighting among the
Arab tribes is absent from the writing of al-ʿUmarī or al-Ḥamdānī.

Al-Qalqashandī, unlike al-ʿUmarī, is not overly interested in the amirs
or state-appointed leaders of the tribal groups, and when he does
mention them, they are not necessarily fierce warriors. An interesting
example is his entry for the Banū Sulaym. Al-Ḥamdānī described the
Sulaym as the most numerous and powerful of the Qays in Barqa, and
al-ʿUmarī added that their amirs are of the Banū Ghirār.
Al-Qalqashandī's contribution, however, is more docile. He adds on a
personal note that he met the amir of the Sulaym in Alexandria in the
770s/1370s, a certain ʿArīf b. ʿAmr. He was a pious man, dressed up as a
Sufi (*faqīr*), carrying an ewer (*ibrīq*) and a cane (ʿ*ukkāz*).[^64]
While al-ʿUmarī idealized on the horse-riding warriors of the Syrian
desert, al-Qalqashandī presents the leader of the Sulaym as a man of
peace and Islam.

#### History and epics

Historical memory is crucial for al-Qalqashandī's conception of Arab
tribalism, as well as for the construction of his own identity. The
primary definition of Arab-ness is that of people who have their origins
in the Arabian Peninsula. By tracing the Arabian, pre-Islamic ancestors
of current tribal communities, the genealogical tradition had the
potential to root the Muslim societies of the present in the distant
past of sixth-century Arabia. Genealogy could also bring a sense of
cohesion, with different tribal groupings, despite their constant
infighting, all forming branches of the same tree.

To emphasize this unity, al-Qalqashandī opts in his *Qalāʾid* for a
hierarchical organization of genealogical material, listing tribes by
lineage and eschewing the geographical organization favoured by
al-Ḥamdānī and al-ʿUmarī. Al-Qalqashandī devotes a short section to the
'ancient dwellings of the Arabs' in the Arabian Peninsula, from which
they spread to other countries, and then moves on to the Arab tribes of
his own time, which are listed by order of peoples of confederacies.
Al-Qalqashandī first discusses the Qaḥṭānīs and their pre-Islamic
origins, and then begins to discuss the Qaḥṭānī confederacies,
conveniently starting with Juhayna (the dedicatee Abū al-Maʿālī
al-Bārizī was a Juhanī). The genealogical section of *Ṣubḥ al-Aʿshá* is
similarly constructed.

Yet this hierarchical organization of the genealogical material did not
fit the information available to al-Qalqashandī about contemporary
tribal groupings. His main source, al-Ḥamdānī, found it sufficient to
list names of clans and tribes, without tracing their lineage upwards.
His material was organized geographically, with fragments of tribal
groups dotted all over Egypt and Syria. Al-Qalqashandī is often
perplexed by al-Ḥamdānī's omissions, and repeatedly expresses
frustration with his inability to fix a tribal name into the correct
branch of the genealogical tree. This also leads him to confusion about
the lineage of numerous groups. He doesn't know, for example, whether
Thaʿlaba of Upper Egypt belong to the same section as Thaʿlaba in
Gaza.[^65] The Banū Naṣr, who give their name to a town near Asyut, may
or may not be part of the Lakhm confederacy.[^66] The Kalb in Manafalūṭ
may be Quḍāʿa, may be not.[^67]

In the *Nihāya*, al-Qalqashandī chose an alphabetical order that allowed
the reader to easily access the tribal name in which he was interested,
even if the ancestry of the tribe was uncertain. This attempt to make it
easier to retrieve information on each tribe reveals al-Qalqashandī's
bureaucratic mind.[^68] But, unlike the hierarchical organization of the
*Qalāʾid*, the alphabetical order of the *Nihāya* lacks the coherence of
a unified genealogical tree. Here, each tribal grouping floats in its
own bubble of time and space -- half located in Pre-Islamic and early
Islamic Arabia, half in late medieval Egypt, Syria and north Africa.

The crux of the problem was that al-Qalqashandī did not have at his
disposal a historiographical tradition that could bridge this gap
between his present day and the pre-Islamic past. Al-Qalqashandī lists
the names of tribes that came to Egypt in the wake of the
seventh-century conquest, as reported by the Fatimid author al-Quḍāʿī.
These include the Judhām, said to be the first Arabs to settle in
Egypt.[^69] But, apart from the Judhām, the current location of these
tribal groupings is generally unknown. Authors sometimes state that
these Arab conquerors mixed up (*ikhtalaṭū*) with other tribes.[^70]

In fact, few historical events pre-date the sixth/twelfth century, and
one gets the impression that the formative period of most Mamluk-era
tribal groups was in the late Fatimid period. As mentioned above,
al-ʿUmarī claimed that his ancestor, Khalaf b. Naṣr, arrived in Egypt
under Talāʾiʿ bin Ruzzīq, vizier in Cairo from 1154 to 1161. Shāwar (d.
1169), another later Fatimid vizier, was member of the Saʿd Judhām, or
perhaps the Saʿd of Hawāzin. He was born in Ithmīda, a village in Ḥawf
al-Sharqiyya.[^71] Even the all-important Āl Rabīʿah confederacy was not
named after any Arabian ancestor, but was rather the progeny of an Arab
man called Rabīʿah, who attached himself to the twelfth-century rulers
Zengi and Nūr al-Dīn.[^72] One also finds a reference to the Fatimid
Famine (*ghalāʾ*) of 1068-1073, when Ṭarīf b. Maknūn of the Judhām
showed his generosity by distributing food to thousands of men. Like the
pre-Islamic Hāshim, Ṭarīf is said to have distributed *tharīd* broth, a
dish not actually prevalent in eleventh-century Egypt, so the anecdote
is definitely a trope.[^73]

Al-Qalqashandī does not explain how the Fazāra came to dominate his home
village of Qalqashanda in the Egyptian delta. Al-Ḥamdānī, in the
thirteenth century, attests that groups of Fazāra were found in Qalyūb,
and that the town called Kharāb Fazāra is named after them. Al-ʿUmarī,
perhaps still citing al-Ḥamdānī, adds that there is a group of the
Fazāra in Upper Egypt and another in Qalyūb and its surrounding
area.[^74] Al-Qalqashandī, following Ibn Khaldūn, knows that there are
numerous Fazāra tribes all over north Africa. Trustworthy informants
from Barqa provided him with the names of the Fazāra clans there, and he
knows that a group of Fazāra from Barqa came to live in the region of
al-Bahnasā, south of Giza, where they became powerful.[^75] While the
association of the Fazāra with the region of Qalyūb appears to have been
established by the Ayyubid period, al-Qalqashandī is silent about the
origins of this association.

If anything, al-Qalqashandī promotes the view that Qalqashanda had been
inhabited by another tribal group, that of the Banū Fahm. He claims this
was the birth place of the Abbasid-era jurist al-Layth b. Saʿd al-Fahmī
(d. 791), even though the dominant view in the biographical tradition
was that al-Layth was a native of Isfahan. Al-Qalqashandī disputes that,
and states that al-Layth's house was in al-Qalqashanda, and that it was
repeatedly destroyed by his cousin, the amir of Egypt.[^76] The
association with al-Layth certainly helped to raise Qalqashanda's
Islamic pedigree, but still did not link the town to the Banū Fazāra.
The high tradition of Islamic historiography was only a limited guide to
lineage and ancestry.

Ultimately, in the absence of useful material in the chronicles,
al-Qalqashandī's generated the historical memories of his own tribal
group through the battle lore of the Arabs (*ayyām al-ʿarab*) and the
popular epics. As seen in the beginning of this paper, his entry for the
Banū Badr relates the elevated status of the clan in the Jāhiliyya, when
they were leaders of the Fazāra, and even of the wider Ghaṭafān
confederacy. The evidence for this prominence comes from the accounts of
the War of Dāḥis and al-Ghabrāʾ, one of the of most famous 'Days' of the
battle lore tradition. This pre-Islamic forty-year war was triggered by
a race between Dāḥis and al-Ghabrāʾ, the two respective horses of the
chiefs of the ʿAbs and the Badr. Al-Qalqashandī finds it useful to
reproduce Ibn Khaldūn's interpretation of the *ayyām al-ʿarab*
material.[^77] But he then ends with a reference to 'the books of the
*siyar*', or popular epics, as his ultimate source of knowledge about
the pre-Islamic Fazāra.

Al-Qalqashandī is undoubtedly referring here to Sīrat ʿAntar, one of the
most popular Arabic epics of the Mamluk period. The epic is set in
tribal, pre-Islamic Arabia, and follows the adventures of its hero, the
black warrior and poet ʿAntar b. Shaddād of the tribe of ʿAbs, with the
War of Dāḥis and al-Ghabrāʾ forming the backbone of a long segment of
the plot. While the basic contours of the War of Dāḥis are known from
Abbasid classical sources, starting with Ibn Qutayba (d. 889) and Ibn
ʿAbd Rabbihi (d. 953--4 or 966--7)[^78], the epic version develops and
embellishes it exponentially. It is to this epic re-telling that
al-Qalqashandī is pointing the reader. We know that manuscripts of Sīrat
ʿAntar were circulating in Mamluk lands since the early fourteenth
century. An epic segment dealing with the race of Dāḥis and al-Ghabrāʾ
is preserved in a manuscript copied in the Mamluk domains in 1444, and
elements of the epic version of the Day of Dāḥis and Ghabrāʾ are already
incorporated into the universal history by Ibn al-Dawādārī, composed in
the 1330s.[^79]

While the popular epics were in wide circulation in Mamluk Egypt,
al-Qalqashandī is, to the best of my knowledge, the first Mamluk author
to refer to the epics in an unqualified positive way. A range of
fourteenth-century authors, from Ibn Taymiyya to Tāj al-Dīn al-Subkī,
decry the popular epics as fabrications, and warn the pious against
reading or copying them. The main subject of their ire are the two
tribal epics of ʿAntar and of Dhāt al-Himma, also known as Sīrat
al-Baṭṭāl.[^80] Al-ʿUmarī likewise expresses scepticism about the epics
in his genealogical section. In his entry for the Banū Kilāb, al-ʿUmarī
says the epic of Dhāt al-Himma and al-Baṭṭāl was composed about the
Kilāb because of their constant incursions against Byzantium. But the
epic distorts the historical figures beyond recognition, and contains
beautiful talk (*mulaḥ al-ḥadīth*) that is predominantly lies and
legends (*khurāfa*). Al-ʿUmarī warns the reader that he searched in vain
for any reference to Dhāt al-Himma in reliable historical sources, but
could not find any.[^81]

Al-Qalqashandī, on the other hand, puts his faith in the epics. Not only
does he refer to Sīrat ʿAntar as the basis for information on the
pre-Islamic Fazāra, but he also creatively adapts al-ʿUmarī's dismissal
of the Dhāt al-Himma epic so that it becomes an endorsement: 'The author
of *Masālik al-Abṣār* says: informants told me that the Banū Kilāb trace
their lineage to the ʿAbd al-Wahhāb mentioned in Sīrat al-Baṭṭāl.
\[Al-ʿUmarī\] found this ʿAbd al-Wahhāb mentioned in sources other than
the Sīra, and said that his name was ʿAbd al-Wahhāb ibn Nawbakht'.[^82]
Al-Qalqashandī is evidently keen to reconcile the popular epics and the
high historiographical tradition. As we have seen, he does so also in
his entry for the Banū Badr in the *Qalāʾid*, where he claims support
from both the epics and 'the books of history' (*taʾrīkh*).

Al-Qalqashandī may have encountered Sīrat ʿAntar in Cairo, or may have
grown up with it in his native Qalqashanda. While I have yet to find
direct evidence for the circulation of the popular epics in the Egyptian
countryside, Ibn Khaldūn thoughtfully considers the hold of the Banū
Hilāl epic cycle on north African tribesmen. Ibn Khaldūn refutes the
poems of the Hilālī cycle as unreliable historical sources, invented
generations after the events they purportedly portray. On the other
hand, Ibn Khaldūn also admits that the Banū Hilāl tribesmen are
unanimous in strongly believing the truth of the epic version, being
transmitted from one generation to another, and 'they would dismiss as
utter lunatic and a complete fool anyone casting any doubt or expressing
any disbelief in the story, because of its overwhelming popularity among
them'.[^83]

Al-Qalqashandī's credulous attitude to Sīrat ʿAntar seems to replicate
the attitude of these contemporary Hilālī tribesmen. In the account of
his Badr clan, the War of Dāḥis and al-Ghabrāʾ is the one singular
component of historical memory that linked fourteenth-century
Qalqashanda to its Arabian roots. Al-Qalqashandī doesn't seem to mind
that in the epic Ḥudhayfa is actually ʿAntar's enemy, a flawed hero who
wins the horse race by cheating and causes the eventual bloodshed by his
inability to resist the scolding of his wife and critics from among his
tribe. For the purpose of identity construction, the sprawling epic had
sufficient raw materials to provide tribal heroes of choice to all who
so wished.

#### Conclusion

The Mamluk genealogical genre emerged in the late thirteenth century,
coinciding with the increasingly tribal character of many village
communities across Egypt and Syria. The three authors discussed here --
al-Ḥamdānī, al-ʿUmarī and al-Qalqashandī - were Mamluk officials, and
the genealogical literature they produced was a distinct branch of
Mamluk state administration. The most characteristic feature of the
Mamluk genealogical literature is the geographical mapping of tribal
grouping, with most groups located somewhere within the Mamluk realm.
While all three authors were sympathetic to the Arab tribes and
self-identified as Arabs themselves, the primary axis of these works is
the relationship between the tribes and the state, and they advised
chancery scribes on the correct titles and lineage to be used in
correspondence with tribal amirs leaders.

Al-Qalqashandī was the most prolific of the three authors, and also the
most ambitious. Probably influenced by Ibn Khaldūn's elevation of tribal
solidarity as the principal vector of history, al-Qalqashandī sought to
expand the remit of the genre to encompass broader segments of Egyptian
society. Rather than merely taking the perspective of the state,
al-Qalqashandī sought to connect members of both urban and rural elites
through a unified Arab genealogical tree. The branches of this tree
included himself, as well as his teacher, the jurist Sirāj al-Dīn
al-Bulqīnī of the Kināna, and his boss, the head of the chancery Abū
al-Maʿālī al-Bārizī of the Juhayna. Al-Qalqashandī brushed aside
al-ʿUmarī's distinction between the 'true' Arabs of the desert and the
Arabs of villages and towns. For al-Qalqashandī, scholars, bureaucrats,
tribal amirs, village headmen and irrigation officials were all equally
Arab.

The shared roots of the tribes laid in the pre-Islamic Arabian
Peninsula. For al-Qalqashandī, the epic narrative of Sīrat ʿAntar seems
to have played an important role in constructing tribal identity, not
least his own. However, the history of the tribes since that primordial
era, that is between the Muslim conquest of Egypt and Syria in the
seventh century and the fourteenth century, is pretty much a black hole.
This absence is not accidental but an act of deliberate erasure. The
Mamluk genealogical tradition Arabizes the landscape and the inhabitants
of late medieval Egypt and Syria, and simultaneously erases the
pre-Arab, pre-Muslim past of these rural communities. Christianity is
not mentioned even once in al-Qalqashandī's genealogical corpus, despite
its dominant presence in many Egyptian villages at least until the late
Fatimid period. As David Nirenberg has shown for fifteenth-century
Spain, the elevation of genealogy to a primary form of communal identity
may well be a result of mass conversions, giving rise to new forms of
historical consciousness.[^84]

Al-Qalqashandī's articulation of his tribal identity could also be seen
as a reclamation and celebration of his own rural roots. He was already
in his sixties when writing these genealogical works, after having
resided in Cairo for decades. Although he achieved moderate respect as a
professional administrator, he never forgot his village upbringing (or
maybe was not allowed to forget it). He constructs a heroic narrative of
his village community, a narrative that implicitly mirrors the epics.
His Badr clan was the most noble among the clans of the Fazāra, both in
pre-Islamic Arabia and in contemporary Qalyūbiyya. They triumph over
their cousins the Banū Māzin. One could imagine the Badrī villagers of
Qalqashanda in Arab attire, riding their horses to battle, and forget
the reality: that these were peasants working the land of the fertile
Egyptian delta.

#### Works Cited

al-Dawādārī, Abū Bakr ibn ʻAbd ʿAllāh ibn Aybak. *Kanz al-durar wa-jāmiʿ
al-ghurar*, vol. 2: *al-Durra al-yatīma fī akhbār al-umam al-qadīma*,
ed. by Edward Badeen. Cairo, 1994.

al-Kutubī, Muḥammad b. Shākir. *Fawāt al-wafayāt*, ed. Ihsan Abbas.
Beirut, 1974.

al-Qalqashandī, Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd Allāh. *Nihāyat al-arab fī maʿrifat ansāb
al-ʿarab*, ed. by Ibrāhīm al-Abyārī. Baghdad: Maṭbaʿat al-Najāḥ, 1958.

al-Qalqashandī, Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd Allāh. *Nihāyat al-arab fī maʿrifat ansāb
al-ʿarab*, BN MS Arabe 2049.

al-Qalqashandī, Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd Allāh. *Qalāʾid al-jumān fī al-taʿrīf
bi-qabāʾil ʿarab al- zamān,* ed. Ibrāhīm al-Abyārī. Cairo: Dār al-Kutub
al-Ḥadītha, 1962.

al-Ṣafadī, Khalīl ibn Aybak. *Aʿyān al-ʿaṣr wa-aʿwān al-naṣr*, ed. by
Fāliḥ Aḥmad Bakkūr, 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1998.

al-Ṣafadī, Khalīl ibn Aybak. *al-Wāfī bi'l-wafayāt*, 32 vols. Leipzig
and Wiesbaden: Schwarz, 1931- 2013.

al-ʿUmarī, Aḥmad ibn Yahyá Ibn Faḍl Allāh. *al-Taʿrīf bi'l-muṣṭalaḥ
al-sharīf*. Cairo, 1894.

al-ʿUmarī, Aḥmad ibn Yahyá Ibn Faḍl Allāh. *Masālik al-absạ̄r fī mamālik
al-amsạ̄r: Qabāʾil al-ʿarab fī al-qarnayn al-sābiʿ wa'l-thāmin
al-Hijrīyayn,* ed. by Dorothea Krawulsky \[= *Masālik al-Abṣār*\].
Beirut: al-Markaz al-Islāmī lil-Buḥūth, 1985.

al-ʿUmarī, Ibn Faḍl Allāh. *Masālik al-absạ̄r fī mamālik al-amsạ̄r*, 29
vols. Abu Dhabi: al- Majmaʿ al-Thaqafī, 2003.

Bauden, Frédéric. 'Like Father, Like Son. The Chancery Manual (*Qalāʾid
al-jumān*) of al- Qalqašandī\'s Son and Its Value for the Study of
Mamluk Diplomatics (ninth/fifteenth century)'. *Eurasian Studies* XI
(2013): pp. 181-228.

Bauden, Frédéric. 'Maqriziana XIII: An Exchange of Correspondence
Between al-Maqrīzī and al-Qalqashandī'. In: Y. Ben Bassat (ed.),
*Developing Perspectives in Mamluk History: Essays in Honor of Amalia
Levanoni*. Pp. 201-229. Leiden: Brill, 2017.

Binbaş, İlker Evrim. 'Structure and Function of the Genealogical Tree in
Islamic Historiography, 1200-1500'. In Binbaş, Kılıç-Schubel and Togan
(eds.), *Horizons of the World : Festschrift for İsenbike Togan =
Hudûdü\'l-âlem : İsenbike Togan\'a Armağan*. Pp. 465 -- 544. Istanbul:
İthaki, 2011. Büssow-Schmitz, Sarah. *Die Beduinen Der Mamluken :
Beduinen Im Politischen Leben Ägyptens Im 8./14. Jahrhundert*.
Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag, 2016.

BN MS arabe 3798.

Cherkaoui, Driss. 'Historical elements in Sīrat ʿAntar'. *Oriente
moderno* 83 (2003): 407-25.

Guo, Li. "Ibn al-Dawādārī". In: *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, Third Edition.

Herzog, Thomas. *"*Mamluk (Popular) Culture". In: S. Conermann (ed.),
*Ubi sumus? Quo vademus. Mamluk Studies -- State of the Art*. Pp.
131-158. Göttingen: Bonn University Press. V & R Unipress, 2012).

Hirschler, Konrad. *The Written Word in the Medieval Arabic Lands: A
Social and Cultural History of Reading Practices* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 2012.

Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, *al-Durar al-Kāmina*. Haydarabad: Maṭbaʻat
Majlis Dāʼirat al-Maʻārīf al-ʻUthmānīyah, 1972-1976.

Ibn Ḥazm, *Jamharat ansāb al-ʿarab*. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya,
1983.

Ibn Khaldūn, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad. *Dīwān al-mubtadaʾ wa'l-khabar
fī taʾrīkh al-ʿarab wa'l-barbar* \[= *Kitāb al-ʿIbar*\], 8 vols, ed.
Khalil Shiḥada. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1988.

Morimoto, Kazuo. 'The Formation and Development of the Science of
Talibid Genealogies in the 10th & 11th Century Middle East', *Oriente
Moderno* 79(2) (1999).

Muhanna, Elias. *The World in a Book : Al-Nuwayri and the Islamic
Encyclopedic Tradition*. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2018.

Nirenberg, David. "Mass Conversion and Genealogical Mentalities: Jews
and Christians in Fifteenth‐Century Spain". Past & Present 174(1)
(February 2002): pp. 3--41.

Rapoport, Yossef. *Rural Economy and Tribal Society in Islamic Egypt: A
Study of Al-Nābulusī\'s* *\'Villages of the Fayyum\'*. Tornhout:
Brepols, 2018.

Reynolds, Dwight F. "Epic and History in the Arabic Tradition". In:
*Epic and History*, ed. by David Konstan and Kurt A. Raaflaub. Pp.
392--410. Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.

Saleh, A. "Mihmindār", in: *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, Second Edition.

Sowayan, Saad. "The Hilali Poetry in the Muqaddimah and its links to
Nabaṭī poetry". *Oriente Moderno* 22(83), No. 2 (2003).

Szombathy, Zoltán. \"Genealogy in Medieval Muslim Societies.\" *Studia
Islamica* 95 (2002): pp. 5-35.

Szombathy, Zoltán. *The Roots of Arabic Genealogy: A Study in Historical
Anthropology.* Piliscsaba: Avicenna Institute of Middle Eastern Studies,
2003.

Tsafrir, Nurit. *Collective liability in Islam: the ʿāqila and
blood-money payments*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020.

Webb, Peter. *Imagining the Arabs: Arab Identity and the Rise of Islam*.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP, 2016.

#### Footnotes

[^1]: Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Qalqashandī, *Nihāyat al-arab fī maʿrifat
    ansāb al-ʿarab, ed. Ibrāhīm al-Abyārī* (Baghdad: Maṭbaʿat al-Najāḥ,
    1958), entry number \[=Nr\] 579; al-Qalqashandī, *Nihāyat al-arab fī
    maʿrifat ansāb al-ʿarab*, BN MS Arabe 2049, fol. 63b.

[^2]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ al-aʿshá fī ṣināʿat al-inshāʾ*, 14 vols.,
    (Cairo, 1913-1918), 1:345. Here there is also no explicit mention of
    the popular epics (*siyar*) as a source for the biography of
    Ḥudhayfa.

[^3]: Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Qalqashandī, *Qalāʾid al-jumān fī
    al-taʿrīf bi-qabāʾil ʿarab al-zamān,* ed. Ibrāhīm al-Abyārī (Cairo:
    Dār al-Kutub al-Ḥadītha, 1962), 114.

[^4]: Sarah Büssow-Schmitz, *Die Beduinen Der Mamluken : Beduinen Im
    Politischen Leben Ägyptens Im 8./14. Jahrhundert* (Wiesbaden: Dr.
    Ludwig Reichert Verlag, 2016).

[^5]: Yossef Rapoport, *Rural Economy and Tribal Society in Islamic
    Egypt: A Study of Al-Nābulusī\'s* \'Villages of the Fayyum\'
    (Turnhout: Brepols, 2018).

[^6]: Peter Webb, *Imagining the Arabs: Arab Identity and the Rise of
    Islam* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP, 2016); Zoltán Szombathy, *The Roots
    of Arabic Genealogy: A Study in Historical Anthropology*
    (Piliscsaba: Avicenna Institute of Middle Eastern Studies, 2003).

[^7]: Kazuo Morimoto, 'The Formation and Development of the Science of
    Talibid Genealogies in the 10th & 11th Century Middle East',
    *Oriente Moderno*, 79(2) (1999), 541-70.

[^8]: İlker Evrim Binbaş, 'Structure and Function of the Genealogical
    Tree in Islamic Historiography, 1200-1500', in Binbaş, Kılıç-Schubel
    and Togan (eds.), *Horizons of the World : Festschrift for İsenbike
    Togan = Hudûdü\'l-âlem : İsenbike Togan\'a Armağan* (Istanbul:
    İthaki, 2011), 465 -- 544.

[^9]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 3:488, 5:431; A. Saleh, "Mihmindār", in
    *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, Second Edition.

[^10]: Al-Ḥamdānī claims to first encounter an amir of the Syrian Āl
    Rabīʿah in the days of Sultan al-Kāmil (d. 1238). He reports
    spending 36,000 dinars on the entertainment of the Arab amir Faraj
    b. Ḥayya when the latter visited al-Muʿizz Aybak (r. 1250-1257), and
    meeting other amirs of the Rabīʿah under al-Ẓāhir Baybars (r.
    1260-77). See Aḥmad ibn Yahyá Ibn Faḍl Allāh al-ʿUmarī, *Masālik
    al-absạ̄r fī mamālik al-amsạ̄r: Qabāʾil al-ʿarab fī al-qarnayn
    al-sābiʿ wa'l-thāmin al-Hijrīyayn,* ed. Dorothea Krawulsky \[=
    *Masālik al-Abṣār*\] (Beirut: al-Markaz al-Islāmī lil-Buḥūth, 1985),
    pp. 139-40, 148. For further reports of Arab tribal delegations met
    by al-Ḥamdānī, see *Qalāʾid*, p. 67 (Banū Wāṣil under Aybak), 88
    (Banū Ghaziyya, dated to 603/1206-7), *Nihāyat al-Arab*, Nr 281
    (delegation from Bahrayn visiting Baybars), nr1638 (delegation from
    the Banū Ṣakhr in Karak under al-Muʿizz Aybak). Al-Ḥamdānī also
    records the granting of of '*būq wa-ʿalam*' (Drum and Flag) titles
    to Arab tribal leaders in Syria. This is an Ayyubid honorary
    designation subsequently abolished by the Mamluks (*Nihāyat
    al-Arab*, nr 329, nr 463, nr 1623).

[^11]: The earliest biographies of al-Ḥamdānī are from the pen of the
    Syrian historians Khalīl ibn Aybak al-Ṣafadī (d. 1363), in *Aʿyān
    al-ʿaṣr wa-aʿwān al-naṣr*, ed. Fāliḥ Aḥmad Bakkūr, 4 vols. (Beirut:
    Dār al-Fikr, 1998), 5:637; and *al-Wāfī bi'l-wafayāt*, 32 vols.
    (Leipzig and Wiesbaden, 1931- 2013), 29:96-7, and by Muḥammad b.
    Shākir al-Kutubī (d. 1363), *Fawāt al-wafayāt*, ed. Ihsan Abbas
    (Beirut, 1974), 4:349. They quote the poetry that al-Ḥamdānī recited
    to Athīr al-Dīn Abū Ḥayyān (1256 -- 1344) and Fatḥ al-Dīn Sayyid
    al-Nās (1273--1334). See also Saleh, "Mihmindār".

[^12]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 157.

[^13]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, pp. 167-8.

[^14]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 174; *Qalāʾid*, p. 63; *Nihāyat al-arab*,
    Nr 1035.

[^15]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 178; *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 771.

[^16]: See some examples, out of many, in *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 258,
    262, 278, 296, 318, 397, 412, 547.

[^17]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 109

[^18]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 115-6

[^19]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 438, 1059, 1104.

[^20]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 616, 1136, 1201.

[^21]: Al-Ṣafadī reports that al-Ḥamdānī composed a treatise on *ansāb*
    (genealogy), as well as a work on *badīʿ* (figures of speech). See
    *Aʿyān,* 5:637.

[^22]: See Rapoport, *Rural Economy*. According al-Nābulusī, writing in
    1245, the Fayyum depression was occupied by the confederacies of the
    Kilāb and the ʿAjlān. Al-Ḥamdānī, writing a few decades later,
    similarly states that the *bilād* - 'lands', or more aptly,
    'villages' -- of the Fayyum belong to the Banū Kilāb (*Masālik
    al-absạ̄r*, p. 175; *Qalāʾid*, p. 117). Other confederacies he
    locates in the Fayyum are the Banū ʿAwf (*Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 165;
    *Qalāʾid*, p. 126) and the Banū Sulaym (*Qalāʾid*, p. 124, *Nihāyat
    al-arab*, Nr 1397).

[^23]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 141.

[^24]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 176; *Qalāʾid*, p. 86. See also
    al-Ḥamdānī's rather positive biography of Ḥiṣn al-Dīn Thaghlab,
    leader of the Arab rebellion (*Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 421;
    *Ṣubḥ*,1:359)***.***

[^25]: This section has been edited by Dorothea Krawulski as *Masālik
    al-absạ̄r fī mamālik al-amsạ̄r: Qabāʾil al-ʿarab fī al-qarnayn
    al-sābiʿ wa'l-thāmin al-Hijrīyayn* (Beirut, 1985). See also Ibn Faḍl
    Allāh al-ʿUmarī, *Masālik al-absạ̄r fī mamālik al-amsạ̄r*, 29 vols.
    (Abu Dhabi: al-Majmaʿ al-Thaqafī, 2003), 4:241 - 398.

[^26]: Ibn Faḍl Allāh al-ʿUmarī, *al-Taʿrīf bi'l-muṣṭalaḥ al-sharīf*
    (Cairo, 1894).

[^27]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 70.

[^28]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 106.

[^29]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 69.

[^30]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 156.

[^31]: See editor's comments in Ibn Faḍl Allāh al-ʿUmarī, *Mukhtaṣar
    Qalāʾid al-ʿIqyā,* pp. 9-10.

[^32]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 69

[^33]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 112.

[^34]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 118 (an anecdote in which the amir of the
    Āl Mirā demands one thousand camels from the Āl Faḍl).

[^35]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 70.

[^36]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 112. This is repeated by al-Qalqashandī in
    all his works (*Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 271; *Qalāʾid*, pp. 73-4,
    *Ṣubḥ*, 1:324-5). See also discussion by Zoltán
    Szombathy,\"Genealogy in Medieval Muslim Societies,\" *Studia
    Islamica* 95, (2002), 5-35.

[^37]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, pp. 154-55.

[^38]: *Taʿrīf*, p. 76.

[^39]: Frédéric Bauden, 'Maqriziana XIII: An Exchange of Correspondence
    Between al-Maqrīzī and al-Qalqashandī', in Y. Ben Bassat (ed.),
    *Developing Perspectives in Mamluk History: Essays in Honor of
    Amalia Levanoni* (Leiden: Brill, 2017), 201-229.

[^40]: *Qalāʾid*, pp. 1-2.

[^41]: This is probably taken from th introduction to Ibn Ḥazm's
    eleventh-century genealogical treatise. See Ibn Ḥazm, *Jamharat
    ansāb al-ʿarab* (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1983), p. 2.

[^42]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, pp. 6-7; *Qalāʾid*, pp. 7-8.

[^43]: See Nurit Tsafrir, *Collective liability in Islam: the ʿāqila and
    blood-money payments* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020).

[^44]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 1427.

[^45]: *Qalāʾid*, pp. 135-6.

[^46]: *Qalāʾid*, pp. 136-7. For the biography of this scholar, born in
    the Egyptian village of Nashāʾ, see Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī,
    *al-Durar al-Kāmina* (Haydarabad: Maṭbaʻat Majlis Dāʼirat al-Maʻārīf
    al-ʻUthmānīyah, 1972-1976), 1:4.

[^47]: *Qalāʾid*, pp. 2-4.

[^48]: *Nihāya*, Paris MS Arabe 2049; Frédéric Bauden, 'Like Father,
    Like Son. The Chancery Manual (*Qalāʾid al-jumān*) of
    al-Qalqašandī\'s Son and Its Value for the Study of Mamluk
    Diplomatics (ninth/fifteenth century)', *Eurasian Studies* XI
    (2013), 181-228, 214.

[^49]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, p. 32.

[^50]: *Qalāʾid*, 12; *Ṣubḥ*, 1:307.

[^51]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, pp. 15 - 20.

[^52]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, pp. 24ff.

[^53]: *Qalāʾid*, p. 12; *Nihāyat al-arab*, p. 11; *Ṣubḥ*,1:307.

[^54]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 143; cited in *Qalāʾid*, p. 116;
    *Ṣubḥ,*1:340.

[^55]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, pp. 408-410.

[^56]: *Qalāʾid*, pp. 14-16; *Nihāya*, pp. 13-15.

[^57]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, p. 23.

[^58]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 1163 (a camel in appears in an anecdote
    that explains the etymology of a tribal name).

[^59]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 482

[^60]: See examples in *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 1115, 1336, 1596, 1447.

[^61]: *Qalāʾid*, p. 71.

[^62]: *Qalāʾid*, p. 63.

[^63]: ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad ibn Khaldūn, *Dīwān al-mubtadaʾ
    wa'l-khabar fī taʾrīkh al-ʿarab wa'l-barbar* \[= *Kitāb al-ʿIbar*\],
    8 vols, ed. Khalil Shiḥada (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1988), 6:7.

[^64]: *Qalāʾid*, p. 125. See also *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 1053.

[^65]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 660.

[^66]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 1599.

[^67]: *Qalāʾid*, p. 48.

[^68]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, p. 4. On the connection between the
    bureaucratic practices of the Mamluk state and the encyclopedic
    genre, see Elias Muhanna, *The World in a Book : Al-Nuwayri and the
    Islamic Encyclopedic Tradition* (Princeton: Princeton University
    Press, 2018).

[^69]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 689.

[^70]: See examples in *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 133, Nr 177, Nr 574, Nr
    922.

[^71]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 174; *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 1037.

[^72]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 112; *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 271.

[^73]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 198; BN MS Paris, fol. 29a. Al-Qalqashandī
    links him to the village of Nūb Ṭarīf in Sharqiyya (modern Nob Tarif
    south of al-Mansura in the delta).

[^74]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 165, 175; *Qalāʾid*, p. 114.

[^75]: *Qalāʾid*, pp. 113-4.

[^76]: *Nihāyat al-arab*, Nr 1449; *Qalāʾid*, p. 111.

[^77]: Ibn Khaldūn, *ʿIbar*, 2:365.

[^78]: Driss Cherkaoui, 'Historical elements in Sīrat ʿAntar', *Oriente
    moderno* 83 (2003), 407-25.

[^79]: BN MS arabe 3798, copied 848/1444, containing the fifteenth part
    of Sīrat ʿAntar b. Shaddād. Abū Bakr ibn ʻAbd ʿAllāh ibn Aybak
    al-Dawādārī, *Kanz al-durar wa-jāmiʿ al-ghurar*, Volume 2: *al-Durra
    al-yatīma fī akhbār al-umam al-qadīma*, ed. Edward Badeen (Cairo,
    1994), 395 - 419. On Ibn Dawādārī, see Li Guo, "Ibn al-Dawādārī",
    in: *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, THREE.

[^80]: The evidence is summarized in Thomas Herzog, *"*Mamluk (Popular)
    Culture", in S. Conermann (ed.), *Ubi sumus? Quo vademus. Mamluk
    Studies -- State of the Art* (Göttingen: Bonn University Press. V &
    R Unipress , 2012), 131-158; and Konrad Hirschler, *The Written Word
    in the Medieval Arabic Lands: A Social and Cultural History of
    Reading Practices* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2012),
    chapter 5 ("Popular reading practices").

[^81]: *Masālik al-absạ̄r*, p. 143.

[^82]: *Qalāʾid*, p. 116.

[^83]: Ibn Khaldūn, *ʿIbar*, 6:25-26. This passage is translated and
    discussed by Saad Sowayan, "The Hilali Poetry in the Muqaddimah and
    its links to Nabaṭī poetry", *Oriente Moderno*, 22 (83), no. 2
    (2003), pp. 281-2; and Dwight F. Reynolds, "Epic and History in the
    Arabic Tradition", in *Epic and History*, edited by David Konstan
    and Kurt A. Raaflaub (Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), pp. 392--410.

[^84]: David Nirenberg, "Mass Conversion and Genealogical Mentalities:
    Jews and Christians in Fifteenth‐Century Spain", *Past & Present*
    174 (1) (February 2002), 3--41.
