---
title: "Recent Publications on the Environmental History of Egypt"
excerpt: "Nicolas Michel"
institution: "Philipps-Universität Marburg"
avatar: "/assets/images/working_paper_avatars3.png"
author_profile: false
type: "Working Paper"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
date: 2020-12-20
layout: single
---


[*Download PDF Here*](https://www.egylandscape.org/papers/December2020_Michel_WorkingPaper.pdf)

### Author: [Prof. Nicolas Michel](https://www.egylandscape.org/members/NicolasMichel/)
*Aix-Marseille Université*

### Recent Publications on the Environmental History of Egypt

A number of recent publications show a growing interest in the
environmental history of Egypt and more generally in the Nile Basin,
during all geological and historical periods. I will present here the
more recent books that have been published on the topic, to the best of
my knowledge, and then I will try to focus on the strengths and
weaknesses of this multidisciplinary scientific production.[^1]

*The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use*, edited by
Henri J. Dumont, presents itself as a precis about works on the Nile
Basin ---and not only on the river itself.[^2] It comes forty-three
years after the publication of the last such synthesis to date, Julian
Rzóska's edited volume: *The Nile: Biology of an Ancient River*.[^3] The
thirty-six contributions in Dumont's volume deal not only with geology,
climatology, sedimentology, but also fauna, flora, microfauna, and the
chemical composition of water. Human geography is almost absent from the
book, except for an article on fisheries, but the contributions
themselves --- as well as the rich bibliographies appended to them ---
will be of great use for historians wishing to learn more about the
state of the art on all physical and natural aspects of the river and
its basin. Two chapters are specifically devoted to the Delta and the
Fayyum. Except for the key articles about geology and hydrology, which
cover millions of years, most of the articles use studies and statistics
conducted from the beginning of the 20th century. Jack F. Talling offers
a chronology of the scientific study of the river in his chapter: "The
Nile: History of Scientific Research" (pp. 23-36).

The history of the Nile from the end of the last Ice Age, i.e. during
the Holocene, is the topic chosen by Judith Bunbury in *The Nile and
Ancient Egypt: Changing Land- and Waterscapes, from the Neolithic to the
Roman Era*.[^4] Her book is a state of the art aimed at non-specialists,
a choice that explains its relative shortness; moreover, it is
abundantly and aptly illustrated with photographs, graphics and maps. A
large part of her material is based on augering, of which J. Bunbury is
one of the well-known specialists in Egypt. She presents this technique
in a useful Appendix, pp. 148-158. Her statements are made all the
clearer by her choice of dealing with her topic in chronological order:
she delivers a kind of narrative of the Nile valley between Aswan and
the Mediterranean.

Several recent publications deal with the archaeology and history of
Egypt's landscape, practicing a multidisciplinary approach with mixed
success. The collective book edited by Yann Tristant & Matthieu
Ghilardi, Landscape Archaeology: Egypt and the Mediterranean World,
publishes the results of a major symposium held in Cairo in 2010.[^5]
The symposium also produced two special issues in the publications
Géomorphologie and Quaternary International.[^6] Respectively, the
contributions about Egypt represent seven articles (out of a total of
thirteen), three (out of seven), and five (out of fifteen). They reflect
a variety of approaches and methods, based on cartography, satellite
imagery, the study of sediments or microfauna, in addition to papyrology
with Katherine Blouin on the prosgenèmata or alluviation; Bérangère
Redon on transverse itineraries in Greco-Roman Lower Egypt. Harco
Willems & Jan-Michael Dahms share the same goals in their The Nile:
Natural and Cultural Landscape in Egypt, with a majority of
contributions in the volume centred on the Pharaonic or Greco-Roman
periods and drawing on archaeology and textual sources; however, two
articles deal with geoarchaeology.[^7]

With The Fayum Landscape: Ten Thousand Years of Archaeology, Texts, and
Traditions in Egypt, Claire J. Malleson offers an original study about
the Fayyum's environment as it has been described during the last three
millennia.[^8] She presents the available sources in chronological
order, as well as with their context and function. Additionally, she
analyses them by cutting a clear distinction between what she calls the
'imaginary landscape' and the 'real' one, i.e. the landscape the authors
--- or at least some of them --- could see and experience. In fact, her
book shows that the clear-cut distinction between the imaginary and the
real landscape does not do justice to the rich aspects of these
descriptions of Fayyum, which include complex religious and symbolic
systems and more or less historical reminiscence, always referring to a
picture larger than the Fayyum itself. One of the merits of this
innovative book is to highlight the link between the pioneering works of
the 19th-century archaeologists and hydrologists, the Greek and Roman
authors they knew quite well, and the Arab sources of which they had at
least an indirect knowledge. In a similar vein, Katherine Blouin
proposes a reconstitution of the landscape of the Mendesian nome in
Lower Egypt during the Roman period, mainly based on an impressive
amount of papyri as well as on literary sources.[^9] She underscores the
importance of the Mendesian branch of the Nile for the governance of the
region as well as the interest of the administration for reclaiming wet
and marginal lands.

#### Towards a better understanding of the Nile Basin

The history of the Nile and its hydrological basin during the Holocene,
i.e. the last 11,500 years, is seemingly well known on two different
temporal scales: the scale of thousands of years, and the year-by-year
scale of the last one hundred years, since the Nile Basin was covered in
the 1920s with a network of reporting stations that allowed a regular
monitoring of its main aspects (Talling in Dumont, 2019).

The last Ice Age was a period of erosion to the interior of the canyon
formerly carved by the Nile; the Holocene, which followed, was globally
a period of sedimentation. Periods of wetter and more arid conditions
alternated; but from the mid-Holocene on, i.e. during the 6th Millenium
BCE, aridification began slowly from north to south across Egypt. In an
enlightening diagram, J. Bunbury shows the results of the alternance of
wetness and desertification on sedimentation, aeolian erosion,
vegetation, and human occupation.[^10] The latter extended itself during
the 4th Millenium BCE from the mouths on the wadis towards the
floodplain. Aridity pervaded northern Egypt during the Old Kingdom and
then southern Egypt during the Middle Kingdom. Soil levels grew because
of various combined factors: sedimentation from the annual flood, flash
floods devastating the wadis and their outlet in the Valley, as well as
aeolian intake. The drainage in Lower Egypt improved slowly and the
number of Nile branches decreased.

The Delta began its formation around 5500 BCE, mainly as a result of
sediments brought by the Nile branches. Nine of these branches have been
identified, with different periods of activity.[^11] Nowadays only a
small amount of the water and sediments carried by the Nile reaches the
Mediterranean. Building the Aswan High Dam resulted in the inversion of
the coastal building dynamic: the coastline is now quickly receding
around the river's mouths at Rosetta and Damietta.

By studying Greenland ices,[^12] it has been possible to highlight
successive phases of cooling on the Poles and aridification of the
tropical zone in the Northern hemisphere: c. 7000-6000 BCE, 4000-3000
BCE, 2200-1800 BCE (corresponding to the First Intermediate Period and
beginning of Middle Kingdom), 800-1000 CE and finally the "Little Ice
Age" from 1350-1800 CE.[^13] However, this chronology can account only
partly for the factors that affected the climate in Egypt, such as:
rains in the northern part of the country, the frequency of catastrophic
events, as well as the Nile hydrology, which depends on rainfall in the
southern part of its basin.

As is well known, the Nile flood depended on rainfall in the tropical
and equatorial areas of the river's basin. During the low-water season,
the White Nile provides 83% of the river flow; during the high-water
season, the Blue Nile provides 68% and the Atbara 22% of its flow. Until
now, the main findings concerning the Nile Basin's paleoclimate have
been based on sediment analyses carried out around and beneath the
Edward and Albert lakes (IDEAL Project: International Decade for the
East African Lakes). They revealed two major phases: 1) from 5400 BP
(ca. 3400 BCE), a decrease in the lakes' water level and an increase in
the process of aridification, which culminated between 2050 and 1850 BP,
i.e. 1st century BCE-2nd century CE; 2) thereafter, a reversal of this
trend, with the last 1,500 years being more wet globally, with two
exceptional arid episodes.

Analysis of the strontium isotope record of a sediment core taken
beneath Lake Manzala makes it possible to distinguish between sediments
carried by the Blue Nile Basin, which are rich in volcanic material, and
those carried by the White Nile; by comparing their proportion it has
been possible to establish a chronology for the last 5,000 years. P.M.
Lourenço Gonçalves shows the close correspondence between the strontium
isotope record curve and the Lake Fayyum level curve, on a graph that
presents the additional value of combining three temporal scales: 14C
dating before calibration, calendar dating (cal year BP), and historical
periods such as Old Kingdom.[^14] Thus, the water level of Lake Fayyum
is a clear indication of heavy rainfall on the Blue Nile basin, i.e. the
Ethiopian High Lands, and of higher floods on average. This
correspondence ceased during the Ptolemaic period when, in the first
decades of the 3rd century BCE, major works at Illāhūn succeeded in
regularizing the access of the Baḥr Yūsuf waters into the Fayyum, which
resulted in a dramatic lowering of the Fayyum Lake level.

Until c. 3100 BCE monsoon rainfall was heavy, and the river flow higher
than what was measured in recent centuries. Precipitation decreased in a
dramatic way until c. 2200 BCE, i.e. around the end of the Old Kingdom;
then, after a quick reversal, the second millennium and first half of
the first millenium BCE become characterized by a long era of average
high floods combined with fast deforestation in the Ethiopian High
Lands. The curves revert between the 5th and the 2nd centuries BCE, a
transition that leads to a new period that had characteristics similar
to the current climate until c. 550 CE.[^15]

Aggradation, i.e. the depositing of sediment, is far more intense when
the proportion of water and sediment from the White Nile increases,
which matches the two periods 3100-2200 BCE and 100 BCE-550 CE; when
this proportion decreases, aggradation weakens and may even reverse into
degradation (i.e. erosion). As a matter of fact, sediment size differs
between the two major rivers, as does their tendency to deposit quickly
or remain suspended (an assumption expressed by Willem Toonen during the
symposium on Egyptian Riverine Harbours, see below). Thus, the rise of
the floodplain level is not as regular as ordinarily thought, and the
average of one meter per millennium conceals wide discrepancies in time
and place. Furthermore, Lower Egypt experiences subsidence because of
the weight of its alluvium.

How can we explain these variations? Pierre Camberlain provides a useful
summary of recent work largely based on the analysis of data collected
between 1951 and 2000.[^16] Broadly speaking, rainfall over the Nile
Basin is linked with the ITCZ (Intertropical Convergence Zone)
oscillations. Camberlain identifies three zones in the Nile Basin
according to their characteristics in terms of interannual rainfall
fluctuations. In the equatorial regions as well as in southwest Ethiopia
(zone 3) rainfall has remained stable during the late 20th century. In
the two other regions (zone 1: from northern Darfur and Kordofan to the
borders of Sudan and Ethiopia; zone 2: between 7° and 14° North
latitude) the trend is a decrease in rainfall. These variations are
affected first by the monsoon on the Indian Ocean, then by El Niño ­­---
which offers a smaller degree of correlation --- and finally by
differences in temperature between the North Atlantic, South Atlantic,
and Indian Oceans. This explanatory scheme may be used for past climatic
variations. It also shows the scale of the task before scientists.

#### Advances in the environmental history of the last five millenia

Attempts to promote the meeting of historians, archaeologists,
geoarchaeologists, geomorphologists, and hydrologists have produced
contrasting results thus far. In this area, the agenda of Egyptologists
and archaeologists is concentrated on a limited range of issues: the
immediate surroundings of major political and religious centres,
especially Memphis, the Pyramids and Memphis necropolis, Hierakonpolis
(Ihnāsya), Abydos, Thebes (Luxor-Karnak); variations of Nile channels
related to the same sites and to major cities in Lower Egypt as
identified by archaeology, such as Avaris, Bouto, Saïs, Tanis, etc.; and
the history of the Fayyum.

One of the main results in the geoarchaeology of Egypt has been to show
that most major urban centres in antiquity stood on harbour sites. This
was the case with Memphis during the Middle and New Kingdoms as well as
the successive royal residences established in the Delta from the
Ramesside Period onward. One of these residences, Avaris/Tell Dabʿa,
which stood on the ancient Pelusian branch of the Nile, was already a
capital during the Second Intermediate Period, then resumed this
function during the Ramesside Period. Exemplary works conducted by
Manfred Bietak, then resumed by Irene Forstner-Müller, have used an
impressive array of techniques: systematic geomagnetic survey,
excavations beneath the surface of current agricultural fields,
drilling, dating by OSL Optically Stimulated Luminescence. Their results
converge in reconstructing a fascinating ancient landscape with a Nile
branch, islands, secondary channels and natural harbours that were
slowly silted.[^17]

Immediate surroundings of major sites have been the topic of decisive
advances. The Nile Valley at Luxor and Karnak has been systematically
explored by regular drilling, drawing lines of boreholes perpendicular
to the river. The floodplain knew a degradation period until c. 2000 BCE
and was characterized by several river branches. From the Middle Kingdom
(2000-1500 BCE) on, as a result of aggradation (i.e. sedimentation) the
floodplain gradually took its present shape main channel formed that has
not substantially changed until now, flanked on the left bank in the 2nd
millennium BCE by two secondary channels, which vanished after the New
Kingdom. Aggradation was fast during the 2nd millennium BCE, then very
weak between 1100 and 600 BCE, very fast again (3 meters) between 600
BCE and the Roman period i.e. during a thousand years; then weaker for
the remaining fifteen centuries.

The environment surrounding Memphis during the Pharaonic age is the
topic of P.M. Lourenço Gonçalves' 2018 PhD thesis at Cambridge
University: Landscape and Environmental Changes at Memphis During the
Dynastic Period in Egypt.[^18] His work is exemplary by its
methodological stance and its careful combination of geomorphological,
archaeological, and historical data. It is based on the analysis of
seventy-seven drillings conducted in the immediate surroundings of
Memphis and in the western area between the archaeological kōms and
Saqqāra necropolis. His findings lead to a reconstruction of the changes
in environment between the Predynastic and the Roman periods. The
results show successive urban and functional reshapings close to those
affecting the site of Avaris/Tell Dabʿa.

The question of variations in the course of the Nile must be studied
within the frame of the classification set up by hydrologists. Morgan de
Dapper emphasized this point during the symposium on "Egyptian Riverine
Harbours" held at the Institut français d'archéologie orientale in
Cairo, 16-18 September 2019, in a contribution entitled
"Geomophorlogical Observations on the Evolution of the Fluvial Landscape
in the Nile Delta Since Late Pleistocene". In short, hydrologists
distinguish between three types of rivers: (1) rivers with a unique,
straight or moderately curved channel; (2) meandering rivers including
anastomosis, i.e. abandoned channels, which are formed when the flow is
regular and sedimentation continuous; and (3) braided rivers, with
several active, interweaving channels, which create braid bars or
islands between different channels, as can be seen with such classical
examples as the Brahmaputra and the Jamuna in Bengal. Rivers move from
one type to another according to the gradient, nature of sediments, and
flow rate. A faster and less regular flow, a higher gradient, and
coarser sediments favour braided rivers. In contrast, narrow floodplains
put an obstacle to braiding, as can be seen in Upper Egypt because of
the narrowness of the canyon between whose cliffs the Nile is forced to
flow; braiding was however possible in Middle Egypt as well as in Lower
Egypt.

Based on this classification, one can assume that the Nile Valley looked
similar to the landscape familiar to us today during the periods when
thin sediments conveyed by the Blue Nile were predominant, i.e. between
c. 2200-100 BCE, then from c. 500 CE on: a meandering river moving
sideways and downstream. To the contrary, the Nile had a tendency to
create more secondary channels during the 3rd millennium (i.e.
Predynastic and Old Kingdom) and then the Roman Period, two ages of fast
aggradation in the Theban floodplain. This assumption matches the
results presented by John P. Cooper: the number of Nile branches in
Lower Egypt decreased in a dramatic way during the 1st millennium
CE.[^19] Here one must take into account human action in order to
explain the relative stability of some landscape features, such as the
embankment of major waterways, transformation of temporary islands to
areas constantly cultivated, etc.

P.M. Lourenço Gonçalves' 2018 PhD thesis is the first work that fully
takes into account hydrological data. At the beginning of the 3rd
millennium BCE the landscape surrounding Memphis still had the features
of a braided river bed, with an archipelago of sandy islands amidst
several channels and swampy areas. At the end of the 3rd millennium, the
former channel between Saqqāra and Memphis had been converted into a
swamp. Then during the 2nd millennium BCE, human activity gradually
transformed this western area into cultivated fields, whereas the former
islands were united into one tell.[^20] Human action played a major
role, as Lourenço Gonçalves emphasizes, and the successive settlements
that created Memphis are the product of a continuous adaptation
effort.[^21]

During the last two millennia the Nile showed all the characteristics of
a meandering river, in Upper as well as in Lower Egypt. The effects are
of two types: the river digs and erodes the cut bank and on the opposite
side creates sandy bars humans strive to consolidate,[^22] and
anastomosed channels that humans transform into marshes for fishing and
then into fields. Besides, catastrophic breaks in the natural levees
alongside the minor bed of the river may create crevasse splays, i.e.
build an alluvial cone within the floodplain originating from the
rupture point. Whether disastrous events that would cause the river to
suddenly get out of its bed and dig a new one, ravaging in the meantime
the floodplain for tens of kilometres, is doubtful.

#### A short inventory of gaps in research

Research on the environmental history of Egypt during the last five
millennia still suffers from wide gaps. The geoarchaeology of Egypt
during the Islamic period is a sort of black hole, due to the almost
complete absence of major excavation specifically dealing with that
period. A brilliant exception has been offered these last years with the
survey and excavation at Tinnis, just published by Alison L.
Gascoigne.[^23] Broadly speaking, the bibliographies of articles in
natural sciences (or hard science) concerning the period seldom include
publications by historians.

With ancient times, most of the problems are linked with the methodology
employed, i.e. drilling campaigns in the surroundings of major
archaeological sites. These campaigns suffer from two limitations
specific to Egypt. The Egyptian Antiquities Service grants or denies
authorization on a yearly basis and on a limited area that is very
difficult to extend afterwards. Additionally, the exportation of samples
is forbidden. The IFAO lab is the only laboratory able to carry out 14C
dating in Egypt, but only on samples of consistent size, which excludes
the dating of the tiny fragments of charcoal or other organic material
found in sedimentary deposits or elsewhere. OSL dating is practiced at
Mansura University; this technique allows the dating of grains of quartz
sand contained within sediments.[^24] To sum up, geoarchaeologists
working in Egypt do not possess the instruments necessary for their
study that are available to their colleagues elsewhere; archaeometry is
falling behind in Egypt.

Dating core samplings is mainly practiced by analysing the tiny
fragments of ceramics trapped in sediment deposits; this leads to rough
dating at best, such as 'New Kingdom' or 'Late Antique'. Historians who
deal with a much finer chronology can hardly be satisfied with such a
broad dating. Sediments are described by considering their grain size,
colour, smell etc., which allows for distinguishing between flood
alluvial deposits (from the river itself or from wadis), aeolian
deposits (a sure indication that the surrounding desert had become
arid), deposits from running waterways or from swamps, and more or less
oxygenated environments. Thus, drilling highlights the existence of
major river beds, i.e. the Nile branches, according to a chronology that
is drawn with broad strokes. Additionally, systematic campaigns of
drilling enable geoarchaeologists to reconstruct the larger picture: a
meandering or a braided river, marshes or a running waterway.

Yet we lack a useful and practical reflection on the environmental
footprint of human activity during the last five millennia. This may be
explained first by the historians' dismay in front of the key issue of
human capacity for environmental action. Scholars agree that the ancient
Egyptians were not able to dam the river Nile itself. But too little is
known about the obscure efforts made by local communities, not by the
state, in order to recharge field soils, consolidate embankments, build
and maintain dykes, unsilt waterways, etc., efforts that primary sources
may allude to but seldom measured. This limitation may be illustrated by
an often-reproduced map: the virtual reconstruction of the Nile riverbed
movements in the Memphis area during the last five millennia, an
attempted reconstruction by Katy Lutley and Judith Bunbury.[^25] This
beautiful map, which calls to mind a colourful spaghetti dish, shows the
river bed moving quite freely within an environment from which mankind
seems utterly absent: embankment, dykes, drains etc. do not seem to have
had any effect. What did the ancient hydrological system look like
anyway?

Many historians and archaeologists still ignore the seminal article
published by Ghislaine Alleaume: "Les systèmes hydrauliques de l'Égypte
prémoderne. Essai d'histoire du paysage".[^26] Here, she showed that the
model of the 'basin system' or 'basin chains' as described by engineers
at the end of the 19th century is not relevant for the understanding of
the hydrology of earlier periods. It is still commonly believed that the
dykes attested in 1800 or 1900 were already in use in Pharaonic Egypt,
and some have tried to find them in ancient written documentation, thus
unconsciously developing a circular reasoning. On the other side, Harco
Willems, Hanne Creylman, Véronique de Laet & Gert Verstraeten highlight
how fruitful the exploitation of the Description de l'Égypte atlas maps
may be, in their case those of southern Middle Egypt, i.e. the
al-Ashmūnayn/al-Minya province.[^27] Their article draws the network of
transverse (sultanic) and longitudinal dykes and from there, proposes to
reconstruct the irrigation system of the whole area in pre-modern times.
The study allows them to assume the existence of several crevasse splays
in the region (fig. 10 on p. 323) and to extend their analysis further
downstream, to northern Middle Egypt and the Fayyum.

Few geoarchaeologists and archaeologists use printed maps; their
cartographic documentation consists mainly in satellite images, which
reproduce current transformations such as the dramatic increase in area
of settlements and the subsequent erasing of older delineations, adding
new changes to a landscape deeply altered already by the move towards
perennial irrigation and the subsequent reshaping of fields. Older maps
dating from the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries are mainly
used in order to localize ancient ruins. As a rule, the extremely rich
data provided by the Survey of Egypt maps from the early twentieth
century remain under-exploited. A counterexample may be offered by
Lennart Strömquist, a geomorphologist, and Ake Engsheden, an
Egyptologist.[^28] They propose to reconstruct in a systematic way the
archaeological tells in Kafr el-Sheikh governorate, by cross-checking
satellite images, the Survey maps, older maps like those of the
Description de l'Égypte atlas, as well as place names (toponymy), the
latter allowing them to distinguish between ancient ('pre-Arab') and
more recent settlements. It is unfortunate that the two authors could
not work with a specialist of the history of the Islamic period, for
most of these sites date from the 1st millennium CE.

##### Bibliography

Alleaume, Ghislaine. "Les systèmes hydrauliques de l'Égypte prémoderne.
Essai d'histoire du paysage." In: *Itinéraires d'Égypte. Mélanges
offerts au père Maurice Martin s.j.*, Bibliothèque d'étude 107, edited
by Christian Décobert. Pp. 301-322. Cairo: Institut français
d'archéologie orientale 1992.

Blouin, Katherine. *Triangular Landscapes: Environment, Society, and the
State in the Nile Delta Under Roman Rule*. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2014.

Bunbury, Judith. *The Nile and Ancient Egypt: Changing Land- and
Waterscapes, from the Neolithic to the Roman Era*. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 2019.

Camberlain, Pierre. "Nile Basin Climates." In: *The Nile: Origin,
Environments, Limnology and Human Use*, Monographiae Biologicae Series,
89, edited by Henri J. Dumont. Pp. 307-333. The Hague: Springer, 2019:
pp. 307-333.

Cooper, John P. *The Medieval Nile: Route, Navigation, and Landscape in
Medieval Egypt*. Cairo: The American University in Cairo Press, 2015.

Dumont, Henri J., ed. *The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and
Human Use*, Monographiae Biologicae Series, 89. The Hague: Springer,
2019.

Foucault, A. & D.J. Stanley. "Late Quaternary Paleoclimatic Oscillations
in East Africa Recorder by Heavy Minerals in the Nile Delta." *Nature*
339 (1989).

Gascoigne, Alison L., ed. *The Island of Tinnis: A Postmortem*, FIFAO
84. Cairo: Institut français d'archéologie orientale, 2020.

Krom, M.D., et al. "River Nile Sediment Fluctuations Over the Past 7000
Years and Their Key Role in Supropel Development." *Geology* 30:1
(2002).

Lourenço Gonçalves, *P.M. Landscape and Environmental Changes at Memphis
During the Dynastic Period in Egypt*. PhD Thesis, Cambridge University,
2018. Online: https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/287733).

Lutley, Katy and Judith Bunbury. "The Nile on the Move." *Egyptian
Archaeology* 32, (2008): pp. 3-5.

Malavoi, Jean-René & Jean-Paul Bravard. *Éléments d'hydromorphologie
fluviale*. Paris: Office national de l\'eau et des milieux aquatiques,
2010.

Malleson, Claire J. *The Fayum Landscape: Ten Thousand Years of
Archaeology, Texts, and Traditions in Egypt*. Cairo, The American
University in Cairo Press, 2019: pp. XIV-326.

Mayewski, P.A., et al. "Holocene Climate Variability." *Quaternary
Research* 62 (2004): pp. 243-255.

Rapoport, Yossef. *Rural Economy and Tribal Society in Islamic Egypt: A
Study of al-Nābulusī's Villages of the Fayyum*, The Medieval Countryside
Series 19. Turnhout: Brepols, 2018.

Römer, Cornelia E., ed. *The Fayoum Survey Project: The Themistou
Meris*, vol. A: The Archaeological and Papyrological Survey, Collectanea
Hellenistica Series KVAB VIII. Leuven: Peeters, 2019.

Rzóska, Julian, ed. *The Nile: Biology of an Ancient River*. The Hague:
Springer, 1976.

Sestini, G. "Implications of Climate Change for the Nile Delta." In:
*Climatic Change and the Mediterranean*, edited by L. Jeftlic, J.D.
Milliman & G. Sestini. Pp. 535-601. New York: Edward Arnold, 1992.

Strömquist, Lennart & Ake Engsheden. "An Integrated Study Approach to
the Geographical Distribution of Ancient Settlements in the Kafr
el-Sheikh Governorate in Northern-Central Delta, Egypt." In: *Landscape
Archaeology: Egypt and the Mediterranean World*, Bibliothèque
d'étude 169, edited by Yann Tristant & Matthieu Ghilardi. Pp. 75-98.
Cairo: Institut français d'archéologie orientale, 2018.

Tristant, Yann & Matthieu Ghilardi, eds. "Charting Holocene Landscape
Changes in the Mediterranean using the Geoarchaeological Approach."
Special issue of *Géomorphologie: relief, processus, environnement* 18:1
(2012).

Tristant, Yann & Matthieu Ghilardi, eds. "Geoarchaeology of Egypt and
the Mediterranean: Reconstructing Holocene Landscapes and Human
Occupation History." Special issue of *Quaternary International* 266
(2012).

Tristant, Yann & Matthieu Ghilardi, eds. *Landscape Archaeology: Egypt
and the Mediterranean World*, Bibliothèque d'étude 169. Cairo: Institut
français d'archéologie orientale, 2018.

Tronchère, Hervé, et al. "Geoarchaeology of an Ancient Fluvial Harbour:
Avaris and the Pelusiac Branch (Nile River, Egypt)." *Géomorphologie:
relief, processus, environnement* 18:1 (2012): pp. 23-36.

Willems, Harco, Hanne Creylman, Véronique de Laet & Gert Verstraeten.
"The Analysis of Historical Maps as an Avenue to the Interpretation of
Pre-Industrial Irrigation Practices in Egypt." In: *The Nile: Natural
and Cultural Landscape in Egypt*, edited by Harco Willems and
Jan-Michael Dahms. Pp. 255-343. Mainz: Mainz Historical Cultural
Sciences 36, Transcript, Bielefeld, 2017.

Willems, Harco & Jan-Michael Dahms eds. *The Nile: Natural and Cultural
Landscape in Egypt*. Mainz: Mainz Historical Cultural Sciences 36,
Transcript, Bielefeld, 2017.

[^1]: . I would like to thank Yann Tristant (Macquarie University) for
    his hints and suggestions. However, the ideas and judgements
    expressed in this working paper are entirely mine.

[^2]: . Henri J. Dumont ed., *The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology
    and Human Use*, Monographiae Biologicae Series, 89, (The Hague:
    Springer, 2019).

[^3]: . Julian Rzóska, *The Nile: Biology of an Ancient River*, (The
    Hague: Springer, 1976).

[^4]: . Judith Bunbury, *The Nile and Ancient Egypt: Changing Land- and
    Waterscapes, from the Neolithic to the Roman Era*, (Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press, 2019): pp. XVI-182.

[^5]: . Yann Tristant & Matthieu Ghilardi, eds., *Landscape Archaeology:
    Egypt and the Mediterranean World*, Bibliothèque d'études 169
    (Cairo: IFAO, 2018): pp. X-276.

[^6]: . Yann Tristant & Matthieu Ghilardi, eds., "Charting Holocene
    Landscape Changes in the Mediterranean Using the Geoarchaeological
    Approach," Special issue of Géomorphologie: relief, processus,
    environnement 18:1 (2012); and, Yann Tristant & Matthieu Ghilardi,
    eds., "Geoarchaeology of Egypt and the Mediterranean: Reconstructing
    Holocene Landscapes and Human Occupation History," Special issue of
    Quaternary International 266 (2012).

[^7]: . Harco Willems & Jan-Michael Dahms eds., *The Nile: Natural and
    Cultural Landscape in Egypt*, (Mainz: Mainz Historical Cultural
    Sciences 36, Transcript, Bielefeld, 2017): pp. 370.

[^8]: . Claire J. Malleson, *The Fayum Landscape: Ten Thousand Years of
    Archaeology, Texts, and Traditions in Egypt*, (Cairo, The American
    University in Cairo Press, 2019): pp. XIV-326.

    Two other important recent books deal with the historical geography
    of the Fayyum: Yossef Rapoport, *Rural Economy and Tribal Society in
    Islamic Egypt: A Study of al-Nābulusī's Villages of the Fayyum*, The
    Medieval Countryside Series 19, (Turnhout: Brepols, 2018); and
    Cornelia E. Römer ed., *The Fayoum Survey Project: The Themistou
    Meris*, vol. A: The Archaeological and Papyrological Survey,
    Collectanea Hellenistica Series KVAB VIII, (Leuven: Peeters, 2019).
    Vol. B edited by D.M. Bailey (2019) deals with ceramology.

[^9]: . Katherine Blouin, *Triangular Landscapes: Environment, Society,
    and the State in the Nile Delta Under Roman Rule*, (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2014).

[^10]: . Bunbury, *The Nile and Ancient Egypt*, p. 58.

[^11]: . G. Sestini, "Implications of Climate Change for the Nile
    Delta," in L. Jeftlic, J.D. Milliman & G. Sestini eds., *Climatic
    Change and the Mediterranean* (New York: Edward Arnold, 1992): pp.
    535-601.

[^12]: . Bunbury, *The Nile and Ancient Egypt*, fig. 2.3 on p. 17.

[^13]: . P.A. Mayewski et al., "Holocene Climate Variability,"
    *Quaternary Research* 62 (2004): pp. 243-255.

[^14]: . P.M. Lourenço Gonçalves, *Landscape and Environmental Changes
    at Memphis During the Dynastic Period in Egypt*, (PhD Thesis,
    Cambridge University, 2018): fig. 6 on p. 24.

[^15]: . A. Foucault and D.J. Stanley, "Late Quaternary Paleoclimatic
    Oscillations in East Africa Recorder by Heavy Minerals in the Nile
    Delta," *Nature* 339 (1989): pp. 44-46; and, M.D. Krom, et al.,
    "River Nile Sediment Fluctuations Over the Past 7000 Years and Their
    Key Role in Supropel Development," *Geology* 30:1 (2002): pp. 71-74.

[^16]: . Pierre Camberlain, "Nile Basin Climates," in Henri J. Dumont,
    ed., *The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use*,
    Monographiae Biologicae Series, 89, (The Hague: Springer, 2019): pp.
    307-333.

[^17]: . Hervé Tronchére, et al., "Geoarchaeology of an Ancient Fluvial
    Harbour: Avaris and the Pelusiac Branch (Nile River, Egypt),"
    *Géomorphologie: relief, processus, environnement* 18:1 (2012): pp.
    23-36.

[^18]: . P.M. Lourenço Gonçalves, *Landscape and Environmental Changes
    at Memphis During the Dynastic Period in Egypt*, (PhD Thesis,
    Cambridge University, 2018). Online:
    [[https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/287733]{.underline}](https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/287733).

[^19]: . John P. Cooper, *The Medieval Nile: Route, Navigation, and
    Landscape in Medieval Egypt*, (Cairo: The American University in
    Cairo Press, 2015).

[^20]: . P.M. Lourenço Gonçalves, *Landscape and Environmental Changes
    at Memphis During the Dynastic Period in Egypt*, fig. 43 on pp.
    222-223.

[^21]: . Ibid., pp. 243-245.

[^22]: . Bunbury, *The Nile and Ancient Egypt*.

[^23]: . Alison L. Gascoigne, ed., *The Island of Tinnis: A Postmortem*,
    FIFAO 84, (Cairo: Institut français d'archéologie orientale, 2020).

[^24]: . Willem Toonen, "Holocene Development of the Interconnected
    Fluvial and Cultural Landscape of the River Nile Near Luxor",
    *Communication at the Symposium Egyptian Riverine Harbours*, (Cairo:
    IFAO, 16-18 September 2019).

[^25]: . Katy Lutley and Judith Bunbury, "The Nile on the Move,"
    *Egyptian Archaeology* 32, (2008): pp. 3-5.

[^26]: . Ghislaine Alleaume, "Les systèmes hydrauliques de l'Égypte
    prémoderne. Essai d'histoire du paysage," in: Christian Décobert,
    ed., *Itinéraires d'Égypte. Mélanges offerts au père Maurice Martin
    s.j*., Bibliothèque d'étude 107 (Cairo: Institut français
    d'archéologie orientale, 1992): pp. 301-322.

[^27]: . Harco Willems, Hanne Creylman, Véronique de Laet & Gert
    Verstraeten, "The Analysis of Historical Maps as an Avenue to the
    Interpretation of Pre-Industrial Irrigation Practices in Egypt," in:
    Harco Willems & Jan-Michael Dahms, eds., *The Nile: Natural and
    Cultural Landscape in Egypt*, (Mainz: Mainz Historical Cultural
    Sciences 36, Transcript, Bielefeld, 2017): pp. 255-343.

[^28]: . Lennart Strömquist & Ake Engsheden, "An Integrated Study
    Approach to the Geographical Distribution of Ancient Settlements in
    the Kafr el-Sheikh Governorate in Northern-Central Delta, Egypt,"
    in: Yann Tristant & Matthieu Ghilardi, eds., *Landscape Archaeology:
    Egypt and the Mediterranean World*, Bibliothèque d'étude 169,
    (Cairo: Institut français d'archéologie orientale, 2018): pp. 75-98.
