---
title: “And Meat of Birds that They May Desire”
excerpt: "Heba AbdelNaby"
institution: "Alexandria University"
avatar: "/assets/images/working_paper_avatars2.png"
author_profile: false
type: "Working Paper"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
date: 2020-10-01
layout: single
---

[*Download PDF Here*](https://www.egylandscape.org/papers/October2020_AbdelNaby_WorkingPaper.pdf)

### Author: [Heba Saad Abdelnaby](https://www.egylandscape.org/members/HebaSaadAbdelnaby/)
**Professor of Islamic Archaeology** 
*Alexandria University*

#### Introduction 

The military upbringing of the Mamluks included physical and mental
preparation in addition to military training; therefore, good nutrition
was an essential element in the developmental process. The Mamluks, who
later became sultans and amīrs, were always keen to maintain a balanced
diet that was mostly lavish due to their wealth and opulent lifestyle.
Birds were an indispensable component of the Mamluk diet and were eaten
in large quantities at most of the plushy events and festivals. Unlike
other kinds of meat, birds were also available for other social classes
in different context. In order to show the importance of birds as an
essential component of the diet during the Mamluk period, I will discuss
how they were consumed by the various classes and also their importance
for the upper class of the society in particular.

#### Preparing and Serving Food for the Sultan and His Entourage

The Mamluk sultan**,** who inhabited the Citadel with his family and
entourage, was served by many professional court-men and his needs were
provided through several sultanic houses or *al-buyūt
al-sulṭāniyya*.[^1] Due to the accurate organization of the Mamluk
sultanate and its institutions, many sultanic houses and professions
were related to the production and serving of food. *Al-ḥawāijkhānāh*
and *al-maṭbakh al-sulṭānī* were the two houses directly connected to
food. The first, *al-ḥawāijkhānāh*, was supervised by the vizier, and it
was responsible for paying the in-kind salaries for the kitchen and for
all the beneficiaries of in-kind salaries, such as the amīrs, mamluks,
soldiers, religious men, and others. It also paid out spices, oils,
grains, and other items needed for food production; thus, huge amounts
of such items were spent daily.[^2] The second house, *al-maṭbakh
al-sulṭānī* or the kitchen, was responsible for the preparation and
cooking of the sultan's regular meals (lunch and dinner), and the
unforeseen meals that might come up during the day or night, in addition
to the special banquets that were held in the Great Hall (*al-iwān
al-kabīr)* during procession days.[^3] Various kinds of meat and
poultry, spices, oils and other items were brought in large amounts to
the kitchen daily from *al-ḥawāijkhānāh*, and huge amounts of meat,
chicken, geese and luxurious dishes were prepared there.[^4]

The Citadel was supplied with its needs regularly until al-Nāṣir
Muḥammad established *al-ḥawsh* inside the Citadel to be a place
designated for breeding and keeping of livestock and birds needed by
*al-ḥawāijkhānāh*. The sources state that it was established in 718/1318
or, more probably, in 738/1337.[^5] The site of *al-ḥawsh* was
previously a hollow or a valley created after quarrying the area's stone
for the construction in the Citadel, resulting in a huge deep area of
about four acres.[^6] The establishment of *al-ḥawsh* was accomplished
in thirty-six days, after which sheep and cattle were brought and houses
for geese and other birds were built in it.[^7] Servants and attendants
were employed at *al-ḥawsh* to take care of the animals and birds.
Al-Nāṣir Muḥammad payed special attention to geese so he devoted a side
in *al-ḥawsh* for their breeding and assigned a number of servants and
maidservants for their care.[^8] In his time, the cost of the green
legumes needed for feeding the geese chicks alone reached fifty thousand
*dirhams* daily.[^9] He also cared for breeding pigeons and built
dovecotes for them at *al-ḥawsh*.[^10]

The organization of the sultanic houses was not different from the
general organization of the Mamluk Sultanate, which focused special care
on proficiency and was marked with detailed protocols and procedures.
According to the custom, each of the above-mentioned sultanic houses was
directed by a high official who was helped by several assistants, each
performing a specific specialized function. *Al-ḥawāijkhānāh* was headed
by an amīr entitled *ustādār*,[^11] who was responsible for providing
the needs of the house and managing its expenses. He was generally an
amīr of thousand or at least an amīr of forty.[^12] The kitchen was
headed by an amīr entitled *ustādār al-ṣuḥba*, who was the general
supervisor over the kitchen and could discuss with the sultan all
matters related to his food and kitchen. He also walked in front of the
food before serving it to the sultan and stood in front of banquets[^13]
and was usually chosen from the amīrs of ten or twenty.[^14] The
*mushrif* was an amīr helping ustādār al-ṣuḥba by supervising the
preparation of food.[^15] He was also helped by the chief or senior
cooker who was entitled *āsbāsalār*.[^16] Other professions in the
kitchen included the supervisor of the grilled meats and birds who was
entitled *amīr mashwī* who was an amīr of ten,[^17] in addition to a
number of *maraqdāriyya*[^18] and servants. Serving food was related to
other professions; at the top of them was that of *al-jāshānkīr* who was
responsible for the banquets with the *ustādār* and accompanied the
*ustādār al-ṣuḥba* in standing in front of the banquet. Moreover, he
tasted the food and drinks before serving them to the sultan fearing
that they were poisoned.[^19] The *jāshānkīr* was helped by the
*khwānsalār*, who was responsible for organizing and preparing banquets
and serving food alongside his assistants during these events.[^20]
Lastly, the *sāqī* also helped in serving food and cutting meat during
banquets, but he was mainly responsible for serving drinks after the
meals.[^21]

#### Consumption of Birds in Festivals and Feasts

Birds were among the food items cooked daily in the sultan's kitchen to
be served in his meals. They were also served in banquets '*āṣmiṭah*'
that were held during feasts, procession days, and festivals since they
were considered luxurious food. The largest banquets were held on
procession days as a huge banquet occupied the *iwān*, from one end to
the other, and was filled with various luxurious dishes. The sultan sat
on the head of the table, flanked by amīrs who were arranged according
to their ranks, following a strict order of hierarchy. They all ate
lightly and then left so other amīrs could take their places and so on
till the banquet was over.[^22] The Mamluk sultans held other banquets
when they played polo with their amīrs, when they traveled for hunting,
when they celebrated the inauguration of a new institution built by the
sultan and in other important events. Such banquets were all marked with
luxurious food --- including birds --- and chroniclers paid special
attention to record the varieties and quantities of food in such events
to attest to the wealth and signify the class status of the Mamluk
elite. Examples of such events and accompanying banquets are numerous,
such as the celebration held by Sultan Barqūq for the inauguration of
his madrasa in 788/1386 by having a fancy banquet which stretched from
the madrasa's prayer niche to the fountain of its open court. The
banquet was loaded with luxurious dishes and grilled meat of horses,
sheep, geese, chicken, and deer; and it was followed by another banquet
of desserts and fruits.[^23] In 915 / 1509 Sultan al-Ghawrī held a
celebration in the square below the Citadel, to which he invited the
four chief judges, all the amīrs of all ranks, all officials, and other
notable people. The opulent banquet included one thousand and five
hundred *raṭls* of meat, one thousand chickens, five hundred geese in
addition to fruits, desserts and sugar, and other lavish items that were
evaluated to exceed one thousand *dinārs* in cost.[^24]

Playing polo with the amīrs was an important occasion to entertain and
at the same time show off the power and superiority of the Mamluks. It
was also a chance to convey control of resources by having luxurious
banquets of various lavish food, part of which were birds. On such
occasions the amīrs were usually divided into two teams; one headed by
the sultan and the other headed by *ātābak al-ʿaskar*. A huge banquet
was held after the game, the cost of which was covered by the head of
the defeated team. Needless to say, such banquets were very expensive-
probably costing thousands of *dinārs* - due to the huge number of
animals, birds, desserts, and drinks that were served. Therefore,
sometimes the sultan covered its cost, even when his team won the game,
to relieve such a large financial burden from a close or preferred
amīr.[^25] An example of this was in 800/1397 when Sultan Barqūq won the
game over Āytmash[^26] and the latter committed to prepare the banquet,
but the sultan staged it instead. They held a huge tent in the square
and the banquet included twenty thousand *raṭls* of meat, two hundred
pairs of geese, one thousand chicken, twenty horses, thirty *raṭls* of
sugar for desserts and drinks, and thirty *raṭls* of raisin for
beverages.[^27]

Birds were also among the luxurious dishes that were prepared in the
kitchen of the sultan to be sent to the houses of notable officials in
certain occasions and feasts. During the *Nawrūz* feast --- which was
one of the great feasts in Egypt --- the sultan used to distribute food
to notable Copts. He sent them fruits such as pomegranates, dates,
peaches, quince, apples, pears, grapes, bananas, watermelon, figs, etc.
He also sent them large dishes of *harisa* made with chicken, geese, and
lamb meat in addition to desserts and other nice items.[^28]

Birds were also among the main food items prepared for the sultan when
traveling on long journeys. For example, in 719/1319, when al-Nāṣir
Muḥammad was travelling for pilgrimage, pots of gold, silver and copper
were made for him to be used for cooking during travel. Special basins
of wood were prepared and planted with various plants that might be
needed for cooking. The sultan's deputy in Damascus prepared camels
carrying five hundred packs of desserts, sugar and fruits, and one
hundred and eighty packs of pomegranate seeds and almonds in addition to
other items that might be needed for cooking, while Karīm al-Dīn
prepared for the sultan one thousand geese and three thousand
chicken.[^29]

In-kind gifts from the sultan to his amīrs or from top-ranking amīrs to
the sultan usually included birds too. When sultan Faraj ibn Barqūq fell
ill in 814/1411 all the amīrs visited him and offered him gifts varying
according to their ranks. The gift of the vizier to the sultan, for
example, included two thousand *dinars*, four hundred chicken, one
hundred geese, two hundred *raṭls* of refined sugar in addition to
fruits and desserts.[^30] A lavish gift was offered by the caliph
al-Mutawakil to the sultan al-Ghawrī when he passed by Dahshūr --- the
home town of the caliph --- on his way to the Fayyūm in 918/1513 and the
gift included sheep, cattle, lots of chicken and geese, jars of honey
and milk and many other things.[^31]

Similarly, birds were amongst the offerings of the Mamluk sultan to the
ambassadors and envoys of foreign countries, as a sign of respect and
appreciation. Such offerings were usually very generous, as they
intended to convey the richness and bounty of the Mamluk sultans and
accordingly the wealth and power of their sultanate. For example, when
the envoys of Tamerlane visited Egypt in 806/1403, the sultan ordered to
give them three hundred *raṭls* of mutton, a number of geese and chicken
and other foods daily in addition to one thousand *dirhams*.[^32] When
Janus, king of Cyprus, was imprisoned in Egypt, the sultan ordered to
give him twenty *raṭls* of meat and six chicken daily in addition to
five hundred *dirhams* for other foods that he might need.[^33]

Moreover, we have evidence of some amīrs paying special attention to
food in general and birds in particular, and who were known for
consuming large numbers of birds. The vizier Fakhr al-Dīn Mājid ibn
Khaṣīb was one of those, as he was interested in banquets and his
kitchen cooked one thousand *raṭls* of meat in addition to geese and
chicken daily. Every day after dinner, he used to spend two hundred and
fifty *dirhams* to buy *ṭājīn* chicken and fried quails, pigeons,
finches, and chicken.[^34] Yalbughā al-Nāṣirī was also famous for his
love and care for food, that his expenses on food reached one thousand
*dinārs* daily.[^35]

#### Birds in the General Populace's Diet

Birds were part of the diet of the middle class during the Mamluk
period. They were sold in Cairo at *al-dajjājīn* market, which was next
to *al-shamā^c^īn* market on the way to *al-kharshaf* vault, where large
numbers of chicken and geese were sold. In that market, early on
Fridays, many types of birds such as quails, parrots, blackbirds,
sparrows, and many others. were sold. Some kinds were substitutes of
poultry as they were wild birds but still *ḥalāl* or permissible to be
eaten, while other types were only sold for their fine appearance or
good voices and some of those, such as quails, were sold for hundreds of
*dirhams*.[^36] The sellers used to sit at *Bayn al-Qaṣrayn* area in a
line starting at the door of *al-Kāmilīyya* madrasa till the door of
*al-Nāṣirīyya* madrasa to sell *ṭājīn* chicken and *ṭājīn* geese for one
*dirham* or one *dirham* and quarter per pound and to sell fried finches
or sparrows for one *fils* each.[^37] Other sellers carried portable
stoves on their heads and wandered the streets, selling cooked birds,
grains, and other ready-made dishes.[^38] Al-Maqrīzī mentioned a strange
incident about selling birds in Cairo in Ramaḍān 742 / February 1342
stating that the *muḥtasib* found a merchant in the market of *Bab
al-Zahūma* selling rotten birds. His storeroom contained birds that were
stored for fifty days till they stunk. The *muḥtasib* found 34,196 birds
including 1,196 pigeons and 33,000 starlings that were changed in color
and smell; therefore, he punished the merchant and chastened him.[^39]
This incident shows that huge numbers of birds were available in the
markets during the Mamluk period, which implies huge consumption too.

Such records about the birds sold in markets and the incident mentioned
by al-Maqrīzī all reveal that birds were sold alive only if they were
pet birds or singing birds '*ṭayr al-masmū^c^*[^40] and these were sold
for high prices sometimes reaching one thousand *dirham*. The chronicles
also show that sparrows were sold alive because young boys used to buy
them, for one *fils* each, to free them as a good deed.[^41] In
contrast, such chronicles and *ḥisba* manuals reveal that the types of
birds that were sold to be eaten were sold ready-made either as *ṭājīn*
or fried[^42] but not grilled, since the grill stores sold only
meat.[^43] This was understood because only the upper class of the
Mamluk society could afford to maintain a kitchen in their houses and to
prepare food in their kitchens, while the middle class could not afford
that luxury.[^44] This was due to several reasons, such as the lack of
wood used as fuel for fires,[^45] the danger entailed in keeping fires
indoors since no effective means were available to extinguish them, the
high cost of cooking utensils, and the lack of running water in
houses.[^46] As a result, most of the populace bought ready-made food
cooked by cookers and butchers in the markets; especially from those
sellers who offered a wide variety of dishes at reasonable prices most
of the time.

Birds in the Mamluk markets were made available from two sources:
hatcheries and hunting. We do not have an exact date for the beginning
of the use of hatcheries in Egypt, but the earliest clear mention of
them is in the book of al-Baghdādī '*‘al-Ifādah wal-iʿtbār’*' when he
mentioned heated incubators or '*ḥaḍān al-farārīj* and *maʿmal
al-farrūj*' that were widely-spreading in Egypt. He mentioned that these
hatcheries earned money and supported trade.[^47] Al-Baghdādī provided
detailed information about these incubators stating that each one had
ten or twenty houses, with about a thousand egg in each for hatching. He
described the dimensions of the incubator house and its construction,
the dung used for generating the heat, the care for the eggs during the
tree-week period of incubation, the procedures to maintain a steady
supply of heat for the hatching process and the maintenance of the
hatcheries.[^48] All these details imply that such an industry was well
established a long time before al-Baghdādī discussed it in his book
(which was written in 600/1204). Apparently, the industry continued
throughout the Mamluk period as evident from several hints in Mamluk
sources. Al-Qalqashandī, for example, indicated that the
responsibilities of *al-ḥuwāndār* included the supervision of the
hatcheries.[^49] Al-Suyūṭī also mentioned the ovens used in Egypt for
hatching eggs where fire was created to provide the artificial heat
needed for incubation till hatching occurred.[^50] Moreover, the
travelers who visited Egypt during the Mamluk period were impressed with
such hatcheries and mentioned them in their books, usually describing
them as ovens, each with one or two thousand eggs, hatching within a
three-weeks period and providing the markets with immense number of
chicken.[^51] Hunting, on the other hand, was another source for
different types of birds that were also consumed during the Mamluk
period. *Ḥisba* manuals mentioned that the bird hunters provided a
steady supply of birds to the markets and the *muḥtasib* had to
supervise them in order to prevent their cheating as they might sell
inflated birds --- to appear larger and accordingly cost more --- or
dead birds. Therefore, the *muḥtasib* had to inspect their birds.[^52]

The lower class of the Mamluk society was obviously less fortunate and
rarely consumed birds in their diet. They only had access to birds
during the feasts of the public festivals held by the sultan or one of
the elite Mamluks. When a banquet was held the common people were
allowed to eat after the sultan, the amīrs, and the elite of the
society.[^53] Such events were their only chance to get to taste
luxurious foods such as birds, meat, and desserts.

In the countryside, birds were part of the livestock of farmers who bred
domesticated birds such as chicken, geese, ducks, and pigeons alongside
other farm animals. That livestock was the capital that helped the
farmer to provide his daily needs and it was sold to provide him
income.[^54] Although the domesticated birds were available to farmers,
they were wisely consumed; as farmers depended on legumes, vegetables,
and fish for their diet rather than white or red meat.[^55]

#### Conclusion

The study of birds in the Mamluk society can give us rich insights about
the lives of the different classes of the society, the interaction
between them, and the prevailing food traditions of the era. Various
types of birds were available in the Mamluk society. Chicken and geese
in particular were consumed in huge amounts by the sultan, his amīrs and
the elite of the society since they were considered among the lavish
foods prepared and presented in the banquets of feasts, festivals, and
other important events. The sultan had *al-matbakh al-sultānī* or the
kitchen that cooked birds in addition to other dishes either for the
daily consumption of the sultan and his officials or for the special
banquets or even for the in-kind gifts presented by the sultan to
special figures in certain occasions. In addition to chicken and geese,
other types of birds such as pigeons, sparrows, starlings...etc. were
consumed by the middle class of the Mamluk society. Such types of birds
were usually sold ready-made in markets for reasonable prices since the
middle class could not afford to maintain a kitchen in their houses and
bought most of their foods from the markets directly. On the contrary,
the lower class had the chance to taste luxurious dishes such as birds
only during the banquets held by the sultan or one of the elites when
they allowed to partake in the banquet's leftover foods. Farmers of the
countryside, although they were breeding birds in their houses, did not
depend on meat for their diet but rather vegetables, legumes, and fish. 

#### Works Cited

Ibn Bassām, Muḥammad ibn Āḥmad. *Nihāyat al-Rutbah fi Ṭalab al-Ḥisbah*,
edited by Muḥammad Ismāʿil and Āhmad al-Mazīdī. Baghdad, Maṭbaʿat
al-Maʿārif, 1968

Ibn Iyās, Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad. *Badāʾiʿ al-Zuhūr fī Waqāʾiʿ al-Duhūr*,
edited by Muḥammad Muṣṭafa. Cairo, al-Hayʼah al-ʻĀmmah li-Quṣūr
al-Thaqāfah, 1982-1987.

Ibn Taghrībirdī, Jamāl al-Dīn Yūsuf. *Al-Dalīl al-Shāfī ^c^la al-Manhal
al-Ṣāfī*, edited by Fahim Muḥammad Shaltūt. Cairo, Dār al-Kutub
al-Miṣrīyah, 1998.

-----. Al-Nujūm al-Zāhirah fī Mulūk Miṣr wal-Qāhirah. Cairo,
al-Hayʼah al-ʻĀmmah li-Quṣūr al-Thaqāfah, 2008.

Levanoni, Amalia. "Food and Cooking during the Mamluk Era: Social and
Political Implications." *Mamluk Studies Review* 9/2, (2005), 201-222.

ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-Baghdādī, Muwaffaq al-Dīn. *Kitāb al-Ifādah wal-Iʿtibār
fī al-Umūr al-Mushāhadah wal-Ḥawādith al-Muʻāyanah bi-Arḍ Miṣr*. Cairo,
al-Hayʾah al-Miṣrīyah al-ʿĀmmah lil-Kitāb, 1998.

Al-Maqrīzī, Aḥmad ibn ʿAli. *Al-Mawāʿiẓ wa-al-Iʿtbār bi-Dhikr al-Khiṭaṭ
wa-al-Āthār*. Cairo, al-Hayʼah al-ʻĀmmah li-Quṣūr al-Thaqāfah, 1999.

-----. *Kitāb al-Sulūk li-Maʿrifat Duwal al-Mulūk*. Edited by
Muḥammad Mustafa Ziyādah and Saʿīd ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ ʿĀshūr. Cairo:
Maṭbaʿat Dār al-Kutub, 1956-1973.

al-Qalqashandī, Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī. *Ṣubḥ al-Aʿshá fī Ṣināʿat
al-Inshāʾ*. Cairo, Dār al-Kutub al-Khidīwīyah, 1913-1922.

Ibn al-Ukhūwah, Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Qurashī. *Kitāb Maʿālim
al-Qurbah fī Aḥkām al-Ḥisbah*. Edited by Muḥammad Maḥmūd Shaʿbān and
Ṣiddīq Aḥmad ʿĪsá al-Muṭayʿī. Cairo: al-Hayʾah al-Miṣrīyah al-ʿĀmmah
lil-Kitāb, 1976.

al-Sakhāwī, Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. *al-Ḍawʾ al-Lāmiʾ li-Ahl
al-Qarn al-Tāsiʿ*. Beirut, Dār al-Jīl, 1992.

al-Suyūṭī, Jalāl al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Abī Bakr. *Ḥusn al-Muḥāḍarah
fī Akhbār Miṣr wal-Qāhirah*. Cairo, Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya,
1968.

Ibn Faḍl Allāh al-ʿUmarī, Aḥmad ibn Yaḥyá. *Masālik al-Abṣār fī Mamālik
al-Amṣār*, ed. Ayman Fuʾād Sayyid. Maṭba\'at Dār al-Kutub
wa-al-Wathā\'iq al-Qawmīyah bi-al-Qāhirah, 2015.

al-Zāhirī, Ghars al-Din Khalīl ibn Shāhīn. *Zoubdat kachf el-Mamâlik;
tableau politique et administratif de l\'Égypte, de la Syrie et du
Ḥidjâz sous la domination des sultans mamloûks du XIIIe au XVe siècle*.
Edited by Paul Ravaisse. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1894.

Von Harff, Arnold. *The Pilgrimage of Arnold von Harff, Knight, from
Cologne, through Italy, Syria, Egypt, Arabia, Ethiopia, Nubia,
Palestine, Turkey, France and Spain, which he accomplished in the Years
1496 to 1499*. Translated by Malcolm Letts. London: The Hakluyt Society,
1946.

Tawfīq, Ashraf Samīr. "Al-Ḥayawān wa-al-Ṭayr fi al-Buyūt al-Sulṭāniyya."
*Journal of the Faculty of Arts, Banha University* 29 (2012), 378-418.

Alkhateeb-Shehada, Housni. *Mamluks and Animals: Veterinary Medicine in
Medieval Islam*. Leiden: Brill, 2013.

Ḥasan, ʿAlī Ibrāhīm. *Tārīkh al-Mamālīk al-Baḥrīyah*. Cairo: Maktabat
al-Nahḍah al-Miṣrīyah, 1967.

Baḥr, Majdī ʿAbd al-Rashīd, *al-Qaryah al-Miṣrīyah fī ʿAṣr Salāṭīn
al-Mamālīk, 648-923/1250-1517*. Cairo: al-Hayʾah al-Miṣrīyah al-ʿĀmmah
lil-Kitāb, 1999.

al-Shishtāwī, Muḥammad. *Mayādīn al-Qāhirah fī al-ʿAṣr al-Mamlūkī*.
Cairo: Dār al-Āfāq al-ʿArabīyah, 1999.

#### Footnotes

[^1]: Al-Qalqashandī mentioned that *\'al-ḥawāṣil\'* or *\'al-buyūt
    al-sulṭāniyya\'* are the houses that provide the needs of the sultan
    and his palaces and they were: *al-sharābkhānāh*, *al-ṭashtkhānāh*,
    *al-firāshkhānāh*, *al-silāḥkhānāh*, *al-rikābkhānāh*,
    *al-ḥawāijkhānāh*, *al-ṭablkhānāh* and a*l-matbakh al-sulṭanī* or
    the kitchen. Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ al-Āʿshā fi Ṣināʿat al-Inshā*
    (Cairo: Dār al-Kutub al-Khidīwīyah, 1913-1922), 4:9-13.

[^2]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 4:12-13.

[^3]: Procession days (*āyām al-mawākib*) were six major processions
    during the Fatimid period held on: the beginning of the Hijrī year,
    the first of Ramaḍān, the three Fridays of Ramaḍān, the prayer of
    ʿĪd al-Fiṭr and ʿĪd al-Āḍḥa, Takhlīq al-Miqyās and Fatḥ al-Khalīj.
    During the Mamluk Period processions were held for the prayer of ʿĪd
    al-Fiṭr and ʿĪd al-Āḍḥa, playing polo, Kasr al-Khalīj and the
    travels of the sultan in and out the country. Al-Qalqashandī,
    *Ṣubḥ*, 3:504-521; 4:46-49.

[^4]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 4:13.

[^5]: Both Al-Maqrīzī and Ibn Taghrībirdī agreed on the date of
    establishing *al-ḥawsh* in 738 A.H. while Ibn Iyās said that
    al-Nāṣir Muḥammad started it in 718 A.H. Al-Maqrīzī, *Al-Mawāʿiẓ
    wa-al-Iʿtbār bi-Dhikr al-Khiṭaṭ wa-al-Āthār* (Cairo: al-Hayʼah
    al-ʻĀmmah li-Quṣūr al-Thaqāfah, 1999), 3:229; Ibn Taghrībirdī,
    *Al-Nujūm al-Zāhirah fī Mulūk Miṣr wa-al-Qāhirah* (Cairo: al-Hayʼah
    al-ʻĀmmah li-Quṣūr al-Thaqāfah, 2008), vol. 9, 119-121; Ibn Iyās,
    *Badāʾiʿ al-Zuhūr fi Waqā'iʿ al-Duhūr* (Cairo: al-Hayʼah al-ʻĀmmah
    li-Quṣūr al-Thaqāfah, 1982-1987), 1:1:449.

[^6]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Khiṭaṭ*, 3:229.

[^7]: Al-Nāṣir Muḥammad assigned Āqbughā ^ʿ^Abd al-Wāḥid, the sultan\'s
    brother-in-law, to establish *al-ḥawsh*. Each of the amīrs of a
    hundred brought one hundred men and animals to work in carrying the
    backfill, each amīr of forty brought forty men and animals, and the
    wālī brought the populace and captives to work. Āqbughā sat up a
    tent on site to supervise the work that continued day and night.
    Sultan al-Nāṣir Muḥammad visited the site daily to follow up on its
    progress. Āqbughā was oppressive and tyrannically treating the
    workers and refusing to give them breaks. Since it was summertime,
    many of the workers died from these harsh conditions. Therefore,
    many appealed for the help of amīr al-Ṭanbughā to redeem them from
    work, thus he talked to the sultan who released the forced labor.
    When the work was completed, the animals water was brought to
    *al-ḥawsh*. Al-Maqrīzī, *Al-Sulūk li-Ma^ʿ^rifat Duwal al-Mulūk*
    (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat Dār al-Kutub, 1970-1973), 2:2:433-435; *Khiṭaṭ*,
    3:229; Ibn Taghrībirdī, *Nujūm*, 9:120.

[^8]: Ibn Taghrībirdī, *Nujūm*, 9:171.

[^9]: Tawfiq, "Al-Ḥayawān wa-al-Ṭayr fi al-Buyūt al-Sulṭāniyya,"
    *Journal of the Faculty of Arts, Banha University* 29 (2012), 387.

[^10]: Ashraf Tawfiq, "Al-Ḥayawān wal-Ṭayr", 384.

[^11]: The title *\'ustādār\'* is a title composed of two Persian words:
    *\'istdh\'* which means the taker, and *\'dār\'* which means the
    holder. Thus, the title means the one who takes the money from the
    sultan or amīr and spends it. Al-Qalqashandī, *Subḥ*, 5:457.

[^12]: Ustādār is the spokesman of all the affairs of the sultanic
    houses and he executes all the requests of the sultan. He has full
    authority to provide all the needs of the houses varying between
    expenses, claddings, mamluks, servants, etc. There used to be four
    *ustādārs* for the sultanic houses; one of them was an amīr of a
    thousand and the other three were amīrs of forty. Al-Qalqashandī,
    *Ṣubḥ*, 4:20.

[^13]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 4:21. The banquet was called *\'ṣimāṭ\'*
    or *\'khuwān\'*: Ibn Faḍl Allāh al-ʿUmarī, *Masālik al-Abṣār
    wa-Mamālik al-Amṣār* (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat Dār al-Kutub wal-Wathāʾiq
    al-Qawmīyah bil-Qāhirah, 2015), 35, fn.3; Al-Qalqashandī, *Subḥ*,
    4:56.

[^14]: Al-Ẓāhirī, *Zubdat Kashf al-Mamālik wa Bayān al-Ṭuruq
    wa-al-Masālik* (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1893), 115.

[^15]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 5:454.

[^16]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 4:13.

[^17]: ^c^Ali Ibrahim Ḥasan, *Dirāsāt fi Tārikh al-Mamālik al-Bahariyya*
    (Cairo: Maktabat al-Nahḍa al-Maṣriyya, 1948), 173.

[^18]: The *\'maraqdār\'* was responsible for preparing soup and serving
    it at banquets and helped in the services of the kitchen.
    Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, vol. 5, p. 470.

[^19]: The title *\'jāshānkīr\'* is composed of two Persian words:
    *\'jāshnā\'* which means to taste and *\'kīr\'* which means the
    responsible. This position was occupied by a trusted amīr, and it
    seems that this position was assigned to several amīrs because
    al-Qalqashandī said that their highest ranking was an amīr of a
    thousand. Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 4:21; 5:460.

[^20]: The title *\'khwānsalār\'* is composed of two words: *\'khwān\'*
    which means what is eaten on and *\'salār\'* which is a Persian word
    meaning the presenter. The holder of this position was the head
    butler during banquets. Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 5:471; ʿAli Hasan,
    *Dirāsāt*, 174.

[^21]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 5:454.

[^22]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Ṣubḥ*, 4:56.

[^23]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 3:2:546; Ibn Taghrībirdī, *Nujūm*, 11:243;
    Ibn Iyās, *Badāʾiʿ*, 1:2:372.

[^24]: Ibn Iyās, *Badāʾiʿ*, 4:151.

[^25]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 2:2:786, 724; Ibn Taghrībirdī, *Nujūm*,
    10:155; 12:81; Muḥammad al-Shishtāwī, *Mayādīn Al-Qāhira fi al-ʿAṣr
    al-Mamlukī* (Cairo: Dār al-Āfāq al-ʿArabīyah, 1999), 27.

[^26]: Āytmash was *ātābak al-ʿaskar* during the reign of Barqūq and was
    close to the sultan. He fought Yalbughā al-Nāṣrī and was killed in
    Damascus in 802/1400. Ibn Taghrībirdī, *al-Dalīl al-Shāfī ʿalá
    al-Manhal al-Ṣāfī* (Cairo: Dār al-Kutub al-Miṣrīyah, 1998), 1:164;
    Al-Sakhāwī, *al-Ḍawʾ al-Lāmiʾ li-Ahl al-Qarn al-Tāsiʿ* (Beirut: Dār
    al-Jīl, 1992), 2:324.

[^27]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 3:2:902; Ibn Taghrībirdī, *Nujūm*, 12:81.

[^28]: Ibn Iyās, *Badāʾiʿ*, 1:2:365.

[^29]: Ibn Taghrībirdī, *Nujūm*, 9:58.

[^30]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 4:1:189.

[^31]: Ibn Iyās, *Badāʾiʿ* , 4:292.

[^32]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 3:3:1111-1112.

[^33]: Ibn Taghrībirdī, *Nujūm*, 14:302.

[^34]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 3:1:59; *Khiṭaṭ*, 3:29.

[^35]: Ibn Iyās, *Badāʾiʿ* , 1:2:51.

[^36]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Khiṭaṭ*, 3:96.

[^37]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Khiṭaṭ*, 3:29.

[^38]: Von Harff, *The Pilgrimage of Arnold Von Harff*, trans. Malcolm
    Letts (London: The Hakluyt Society), 109.

[^39]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Khiṭaṭ*, 3:97. The incident was strange because of
    the huge number of birds stored by the merchant and because the
    market of Bab al-Zahūma was one of the greatest markets in Cairo and
    was famous for selling good foods.

[^40]: *\'Ṭayr al-masmūʿ'\* are birds bought for their beautiful looks
    such as parrots or for their good voices such as quails.

[^41]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Khiṭaṭ*, 3:96.

[^42]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 3:1:59.

[^43]: Ibn al-Ukhūwah, *Maʿālim al-Qurbah fī Aḥkām al-Ḥisbah,* ed.
    Muḥammad Maḥmūd Shaʿbān (Cairo: al-Hayʾah al-Miṣrīyah al-ʿĀmmah
    lil-Kitāb, 1976),156; Ibn Bassām, *Nihāyat al-Rutbah fī Ṭalab
    al-Ḥisbah*, ed. Ḥusām al-Dīn al-Sāmarrāʾī (Baghdad: Maṭbaʿat
    al-Maʿārif, 1968), 307.

[^44]: Amalia Levanoni, "Food and Cooking during the Mamluk Era: Social
    and Political Implications," *Mamluk Studies Review* 9 (2005), 204.

[^45]: Arnold Von Harff, *The Pilgrimage*, 09.

[^46]: Amalia Levanoni, "Food and Cooking", 204-207.

[^47]: ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-Baghdādī, *Kitāb al-Ifādah wal-Iʿtibār fī
    al-Umūr al-Mushāhadah wal-Ḥawādith al-Muʻāyanah bi-Arḍ Miṣr* (Cairo:
    al-Hayʾah al-Miṣrīyah al-ʿĀmmah lil-Kitāb, 1998), 81.

[^48]: ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-Baghdādī, *Kitāb al-Ifādah*, 81-83.

[^49]: Al-Qalqashandī, *Subḥ*, 5:470. The title \"ḥuwāndār\" consists of
    two words: *\'ḥayawān\'* and *\'dār\'*, which means the holder of
    the animal and among his responsibilities was the supervision the
    hatcheries. Also see: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 2:2:531.

[^50]: Al-Suyūṭī, *Ḥusn al-Muḥāḍarah fī Akhbār Miṣr wal-Qāhirah* (Cairo:
    Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya, 1968), 2:333.

[^51]: Arnold Von Harff, *The Pilgrimage*, p. 110; Housni Alkhateeb
    Shehada, *Mamluks and Animals: Veterinary Medicine in Medieval
    Islam* (Leiden: Brill, 2013), 23-24.

[^52]: Ibn Bassām, *Nihāyat al-Rutbah*, 317. *The \'muḥtasib\'* used to
    check the birds by putting them in water to see if they floated or
    sank.

[^53]: Al-Maqrīzī, *Sulūk*, 3:2:547.

[^54]: Majdī ʻAbd al-Rashīd Baḥr, *Al-Qaryah al-Maṣriyya fi ^c^Aṣr
    Salāṭīn al-Mamālīk* (Cairo: al-Hayʾah al-Miṣrīyah al-ʿĀmmah
    lil-Kitāb, 1999), 185-188.

[^55]: Majdī ʻAbd al-Rashīd Baḥr, *Al-Qaryah*, 233-237.
